Hello and welcome to the Professional Trading Masterclass video series with me, Anton Creel, ITPM Managing Partner. So guys, you've arrived at the PTM video series. What a video series we have in store for you. whether you're here because you're a retail trader looking to get to a more professional standard, or you're actually an individual who is looking to go into the industry and literally become a professional trader, this is where it's at. This is by far the most comprehensive education in trading you will ever get. So guys, this is what we're gonna do. We're gonna get straight into it. We're going to introduce you to three major concepts straight away. We're going to be looking at the framework of the Professional Trading Masterclass video series and the framework that we're going to use throughout the video series.

And the three main areas we're going to introduce you to straight away are the competency hierarchy, time horizon and volatility, and the pro trader systematic framework. So guys, we will learn those first, and then we're going to look at the most important thing. And this is going to take up the bulk of the PTM video series. It is the trade idea generation process. With the trade idea generation process, we always start with fundamentals. We live in the majority in our trade idea generation process in fundamentally driven trade ideas. This makes up the vast majority of what we do, and it makes up a huge amount of the professional trading masterclass. We are rooted in our fundamentals in both quantitative and qualitative processes. And this is what we call the discovery and evidence phase. It's a combination of both top-down macroeconomic processes and bottom-up company-level or stock fundamentals. Next, we move on to trade timing. how we time our fundamentally driven trade ideas.

This is in the minority of our process. We use technical analysis and price action indicators to time our fundamentally driven trade ideas, okay? We don't use technical analysis and price action indicators to actually generate the ideas. This is a major difference between professional traders, and retail traders. Our trade ideas are rooted in fundamentals, they are driven by fundamentals, and we use technical analysis and price action indicators only to time our trades. Then later, much later in the video series, we are going to be looking at catalysts. So for our time horizon and volatility optimization, we operate in the 20 to 60 day time horizon. And we do this in equities, in the stock market. So this provides us with a very large opportunity set. It gives us wholesale opportunities and a systematic process within this time horizon and within equities. This mandate gives us consistency, which is the holy grail for traders. We want to get consistent outsized returns.

So our trade ideas are fundamentally driven trade ideas that are timed well. We want to be operating within that 20 to 60 day time horizon. We are not investors, we are traders, and we require catalysts for a stock to actually move within that time horizon. So there'll be much more on this way later in the video series. In the meantime, we have a lot of work to do on the trade idea generation process. After that, we have what we call in the whole process, the whole systematic professional trader process, we have trade structuring. So what we're going to do in the PTM video series is actually assume that we're only going to have long and short stock positions. The PTM video series is not an options trading program. For trade structuring, if you want to learn how to structure trades, Using options, you have to take the Professional Options Trading Masterclass, the POTM video series.

Learning how to trade options and how to structure your trade ideas using options is an entire class in itself. It can't be done in the PTM video series, okay? Now, next step of the whole professional trader systematic framework is risk management. And this splits up into two areas. We have preemptive risk management and we have reactive risk management. So preemptive risk management will be taught in the PTM video series. However, there's an issue here with risk management. Unfortunately, reactive risk management simply cannot be taught in a video series. Why? Because reactive risk management involves actually having a position And when you've got a live position, knowing what to do at any one moment in time in a specific situation that's specific to a particular stock. Unfortunately, retail traders, it's a bad habit. Retail traders do always look for rule books and checklists for everything to do in every specific situation. This is not how it works, okay?

So unfortunately, reactive risk management, you have to actually go to the next stage to learn reactive risk management. It can only be taught with live positions, and at ITPM, this can only really be taught on a trader mentoring program. So we will cover preemptive risk management, which is all the preemptive steps that you can take before you actually have positions when building a portfolio. So the best practices of preemptive risk management. Next up in the whole pro trader systematic process is our trader metrics. How do you actually measure your performance as a trader? We're going to show you how to calculate a track record in a professional trader way. It's not just about making money for professional traders. Of course, that's a large part of it. It's also about how you make your money. Also in this video, we're going to introduce you to the ITPM principles, the four ITPM principles, which we're going to be utilizing all the way through the video series.

These are self-sustainability, work ethic, free information, and working smart and not hard. So guys, we're going to get into this video now, the framework. The whole PTM video series, there's many parts to it, many major parts to it. But the first two major parts of the PTM video series, we're going to be covering the pro trader systematic process. which involves top-down and bottom-up fundamentally driven trade idea generation. But first, let's cover the framework that we're going to be using in more detail so you understand how professional traders go about things. This will form the basis of everything we do going forward in the video series. So guys, let's get stuck into it. Okay, everybody, welcome to the computer screen and welcome to the Professional Trading Masterclass video series. Let's get started. We've got a hell of a lot to get through. It's a huge, huge body of work, and there's a lot of stuff to learn. So let's start. Video one, the framework.

Let's start with a little background. Let's get some context about ITPM, the Professional Trading Masterclass. Let's try and understand the bigger picture here, okay? So the Professional Trading Masterclass, the first version, the PTM 1.0, was launched in May, 2013, and it was available from May, 2013 to May, 2020. This video series is the second version, the Professional Trading Masterclass 2.0, which has replaced the PTM 1.0 in May, 2020. and launched in October, November 2021. Now, in terms of content for the PTM 2.0, The PTM 2.0, it's not simply an updated version of the PTM 1.0 with some, say, more recent examples. It's a total overhaul of the video series. And roughly, it's about two and a half times more educational content to help retail traders globally get even better than they were before. What we've included in this video series, the updated version, professional traders by interacting with retail traders over the last seven years.

And that essentially is a big attempt to improve the PTM Video Series even more. Now, going way back to May 2013, when we launched the first version of the PTM Video Series, the trading education industry globally was a total mess. And to a large extent, it still is. When the first version of the PTM was launched and the ITPM really came into global existence, we essentially set a new standard by raising the bar massively in the trading education industry. And since then, guys, we've really helped literally thousands of retail traders to become profitable globally through the original PTM video series and our 12-week trader mentoring programs. Now, also, we have our YouTube content, our YouTube channel, and that's been online up and running since 2013 as well. And that hasn't just helped thousands of retail traders. It's helped millions of people globally change their approach to financial markets and to trade better. When the PTM 1.

0 version launched, the original version, When it launched, it set everything in motion. What it did is massively raise the bar and go global, okay? We took ITPM global and we literally changed an entire industry, okay? We changed the industry for the better. What are we doing now? Well, we've decided to raise the bar again with the launch of the PTM 2.0, and we totally aim to succeed in moving the industry again into uncharted territory. From now on, guys, the PTM 2.0 will be known and referred to as the PTM, the Professional Trading Masterclass video series. Now, in terms of prerequisite knowledge, what do you need to know before starting the PTM video series? Well, you can come in with a blank slate, that's totally fine. But most of you coming here right now, before taking the PTM, you will have taken the Introduction to Professional Level Trading, the IPLT video series.

It's not an absolute necessity to do before you start the PTM, but If you haven't completed this program prior to starting the PTM video series, it's definitely advisable that you do. Why? Because you'll get a far better understanding of the concepts, resources, and teachings of the PTM video series if you do that first. Now, if you're coming here and you have completed it, the IPLT video series, congratulations. You've definitely made a giant leap forward in your trading education. There's definitely not many retail traders on the planet that have acquired the knowledge that you have and the understanding of financial markets that you've now got. You are already in the minority of retail traders, the significant minority of retail traders. And as we go through the PTM video series, you're just going to get better and better and better.

But for those who haven't taken the IPLT video series, and also for those who have, let's just have a quick recap on the key teachings and key knowledge of the IPLT video series before we plow ahead into the PTM. OK, so what did we cover in the IPLT video series? What did we conclude? Well, we found that the approach to financial markets taken by pro traders is totally misunderstood by retail traders for multiple reasons. Secondly, retail traders are kept what we call unconsciously incompetent by the market players that have inherent conflict of interest. Who are those people? Retail brokers and charlatan trading educators. Quite frankly, and this really just sums up the whole industry, there is a whole industry, the entire industry is built around keeping millions of retail traders incompetent. Third, what else did we learn? In emulating the professional trader approach, we learned in the IPLT video series that we have to attempt