Okay guys, here we go. We're at video 20 now and in this one I'm going to explain the concept of

beta. So why it's useful to us and how we can calculate it at both the equity level and the

portfolio level as well. I'm going to start by explaining what beta is and why it's useful.

And then I'll move on to show you the

model behind beta using an Excel example. Following that we'll run through some ways you can calculate

beta yourself both as a snapshot value and in the form of a time series for individual stocks

and then at the end of the video we're going to look at how you can use beta at the portfolio level

to give you an understanding of your market exposure and that's going to enable you to make decisions about hedging and position

sizing within the portfolio. So what is beta? Let me give you a simplified version first. Essentially

beta is a statistic that estimates the economic sensitivity of a stock or a portfolio of stocks to the market as a whole. And by definition the market has a

beta value of 1 and basically that acts as a reference point from which individual

stocks beta is estimated around. So if an individual stock has a beta of 2 then

for a given unit of return in the market, we would expect the stock to move twice as much

in the same direction. For example, if the price of the stock market as a whole increased by 1%,

then we would expect the individual stock to increase by 2% if that stock had a beta of 2%.

Conversely, if the market decreased by 1%, we would expect the stock to decrease by 2%.

market decrease by 1% we would expect the stock to decrease by 2%. So the sort of increases and decreases are magnified by a factor of beta. So if a stock has a beta value of greater than 1 what we can say

about it is that it's more economically sensitive than the market as a whole and if it has a value of

less than 1 we would say it's less sensitive.

Now perhaps the easiest way to start thinking about this is in terms of cyclical and defensive equities. So by definition cyclical equities have earnings that are economically sensitive to the

business cycle which in turn means that the price of those equities are also sensitive to the

business cycle. So think of

discretionary purchases like travel as an example. If the economy is in a bad way then it's much less

likely that consumers will spend lots of money on vacations. All else being equal then we could guess

that these companies have a beta value of greater than one because we would expect that their stock

prices are more sensitive

than the market as a whole to these economic fluctuations. And conversely, we can think of

defensive stocks like grocery stores at the opposite end of the scale. People need to buy

groceries irrelevant of the economic situation and so those companies are likely to

to be less sensitive to economic fluctuations

than the market as a whole.

As a little detour for a moment,

if you take a look at the sheet I've got open here,

it contains details including beta values

on a large list of US equities.

And included in that list are almost 5,000 companies

with GICS sector and industry classifications,

so that's G-I-C-S,

classifications along with market cap data

and beta values. All of these values are accurate as of the 11th of September 2021 and so most

likely they aren't going to be applicable for your own work in the future but I did want to

include them just so that you had an idea of what the beta values for these companies were at the time of filming. As well as

that, perhaps more usefully, I've aggregated all of the stock data to come up with market-weighted

beta values for every GIC sector, subsector, industry group and industry. And those values

are unlikely to change very much in the near future at least so they will give you a good idea of what sectors and industries are sort of sensitive, more sensitive and less sensitive to the economic cycle.

Anyway let me now dive in a little bit deeper and talk to you about where the statistic of beta that

we're discussing here actually stems from and it comes from a couple of different financial models

namely the single index model and the capital asset pricing model, but they both use basically the same theory. The idea of these models is to explain the returns

of an asset using a single factor, so the returns of the market, and any error or excess return in

these models is identified as either sort of firm-specific risk or something called alpha,

depending on the model and the context in which it's being used. None of that stuff sort of firm specific risk or something called alpha depending on the model and the context in

which it's being used. None of that stuff sort of really matters. All we're concerned with here is

that we can create a simple model that estimates how much a stock moves in relation to the market

based on past data. That gives us a value called beta and we can then use that number to accomplish

various things like hedging risks or

understanding portfolio exposure, position sizing and volatility estimation. And we're going to be

doing some of that stuff later in the video through some practical Excel work. Okay, I've made a lot

of references to the market so far and you might be wondering what I actually mean by that. Basically when I say the market I

typically mean the whole equity market that's related to the stock that we're analyzing. So

for US stocks that would be the US equity market. Now it's not very easy to get returns data for the

entire US stock market on aggregate and so what we can do is use an approximation for the market by looking at

the returns for US stock indices like the S&P 500. And as it turns out, the S&P 500 is

actually a pretty good approximation for the market as a whole because it accounts for

the majority of economic output of listed companies.

let's have a look at the spreadsheet now and to start things off I'm going to talk about something

called a simple linear regression model which defines an equation with which we can then retrieve

beta from. Okay as you can see here there's four sheets in this workbook which by the way you'll

be able to download yourselves in the downloads area for this video. We're going to work from

right to left here starting with calculating beta at the individual

asset level and then moving up to the portfolio level at the end of the video. All right so let's

look at this equity beta sheet first and I'll explain what's going on here. What we've got is

a sheet pre-filled with weekly prices and returns for the S&P 500 and two stocks, Sanderson Farms and

Fluor Corporation. Prices are in columns B to D and returns are in columns E through G.

On the right hand side of the sheet there are some short company descriptions for each stock

and they describe the sort of business that they're in. So if you take a look, Sanderson

Farms is basically a poultry company whilst Floor Corporation is an engineering business.

Now in the middle of the sheet I've got a scatter plot chart showing the weekly returns data for both Sanderson Farms and the S&P 500.

Where Sanderson Farms returns are plotted on the y-axis and S&P 500 returns are plotted on the x-axis.

So each dot on the chart basically represents a

weekly observation for the two sets of returns. So for example if we look at the 25th of June

observation here we can see that Sanderson Farms returned 24.61% that week and the S&P 500 returned

2.74%. In the chart that would be one of these dots that you can see around here and we know

that because if we look across from those points to the y-axis you can see the return value for

Sanderson Farms is around 25% whilst if we look down from those points to the x-axis you can also

observe that the value for S&P returns is around 2.5%. As well as the dots representing each weekly observation

in our data, I've also got a black dotted line running through all of these points which actually

represents what's called a simple linear regression line. That line's calculated by minimizing the

summed squared vertical distances between all observations and their means which is known as the ordinary least squared method.

However you know you guys don't really need to know that you guys can just think of it basically as a line of best fit through all of this data.

Anyway that line can be represented by an equation known as the regression equation

and in this example I've written that in the top right of the chart so the equation is y equals 0.5656x plus 0.0022

Now for those of you that can remember back to your high school maths you'd know that this

equation is in the form of a straight line. When I was at school we learned that in the form of

y equals mx plus c where every y value could be worked out as some coefficient m multiplied by

the related x observation plus some constant. So what does that actually mean? Well our y observations here

are our Sanderson farm returns and our x observations are S&P 500 returns. So the model

equation estimates on average that the returns for Sanderson farms are equal to multiplying the S&P 500 returns over the same period by 0.5656 and adding 0.0022 or 0.22%.

Now remember earlier when I described what beta was. It's essentially a measure of sensitivity of

a stock's returns to the market or the S&P 500 in this case. So the value of sensitivity here can

simply be measured by calculating the gradient of this line since that represents the change in

predicted Sanderson farm returns given a unit change in S&P 500 returns. The gradient of a straight line

is just the coefficient of the equation before the x observation. So in the case of the slope or gradient here it's 0.5656. That means for example if S&P 500

returns are expected to increase by 5% then Sanderson Farms returns would be

expected to increase by 5% multiplied by that 0.5656 number which is about 2.8%.

So let's go through a quick calculation example using the equation just to reinforce that concept.

If our x value S&P 500 returns that is measures 0%, then the regression model equation we have predicts that our

y value, which is our Sanderson Farm returns, should be equal to 0.5656 times by 0 plus 0.0022.

Okay, and that is obviously just the constant at the end, which is 0.22%. If the S&P 500 return measures 5% then our regression equation predicts

that Sanderson Farms return should be 0.5656 times 5% or 0.05 plus 0.0022 which equals 0.03 roughly or 3.048%. And you can see there that an increase in S&P 500 returns of 5% led to

a predicted increase of about 2.8% in Sanderson Farm returns. Now hopefully all of that made sense but basically

what I've done here is generate a simple linear regression line using the returns data we have

for the S&P 500 and Sanderson Farms. The equation for that line represents a model that aims to

predict the returns for Sanderson Farms based on the returns over the same period for the S&P 500.

The gradient of the line tells us the sensitivity of Sanderson Farms returns to the S&P 500 which is simply the

coefficient of our x values in the equation. So in this case that value is 0.5656 and that

is our estimation of beta. Since that value of beta is less than 1 it means we should expect

Sanderson Farms returns to be less economically sensitive than the market as a whole as represented by the S&P 500 index and more specifically it predicts given the underlying data set that we've

used that any change in returns for Sanderson Farms will be equal to around 0.5656 multiplied

by the change in returns seen in the S&P 500 over the same period. Okay, don't worry at this stage if I've lost you.

Realistically, all you need to know here is how to calculate beta for a stock, which I'm going to

show you now, and also what beta represents, which we've kind of been through already.

So to that end, let me drill this home though one more time. Beta represents the economic sensitivity of an asset and by definition

the market has a beta value of one and so any stock that has a beta of over one is said to be

more economically sensitive than the market so think cyclical sectors and any stock with a beta

of less than one is said to be less economically sensitive than the market so think defensive sectors. If a stock has a beta of one it means that a simple linear regression model

predicts that for every one percent change in returns for the market there will also be a one

percent change in returns for the stock. If a stock has a beta of 0.5 then we can estimate for

every one percent change in return in the market there is a 0.5%

change in returns for the stock in the same direction. That's a key point here. When beta

values are positive it means the changes will be in the same direction as the market.

In the unlikely scenario that you calculate a negative beta then that would suggest that changes in stock

returns move in the opposite direction to changes in market returns. Okay so you'll be pleased to

know now that I'm done clarifying beta so let's move on to how to calculate it in excel now and

we can do this in a number of ways. The first way I'm going to show you is via a scatterplot chart

as I've done here with Sanderson Farms except this time I'm going to go through the whole process of creating

the chart and the equation for Fluor Corporation. Although this is by no means the quickest way

of estimating beta

It will teach you a few more things about charting in Excel.

And I think it's always handy really to be able to generate scatter plot charts given it's a great way of visualizing and understanding data and relationships between variables.

And that knowledge can be translated to other applications as well.

So other data analysis applications.

So to begin with I'm just going to select cell I21 and then go to insert on the ribbon and choose to insert a scatter plot chart.

Once that's done I'm going to get a blank chart area appear and I'm just going to move and resize that so it looks roughly the same as the Sanderson Farms chart area above.

And then we're going to right click within that chart area and go to select data to add the data series that we need.

To do that I'm going to click the data series that we need. To do that

I'm going to click the add series button on the left hand side. The series name is just going to

be FLR versus SP500 returns okay that's just because we're plotting a scatterplot chart of

our weekly observations for floor corporation versus S&P 500 returns here. Now our x values are going to be our market returns

our S&P 500 returns and our y values are going to be our stock returns and that has to be the case

whenever you're calculating beta. Y values are always going to be stock returns, x values are going to run from cell e2 down to cell I think e2000 and something.

Okay so cell e2000, here we go, 2165. The reason why I'm making the range down to that row is so that it matches the

length of our Fluor Corporation returns, okay? And when you're doing analysis like this, the ranges,

the arrays that you pick always have to be the same length, okay? So that's our x values,

our market returns. So our y values are just going to be the same sort of references but in column G.

So from cell G2 down to cell G2165.

Then we're going to press OK and OK again.

Scroll back to the top of the chart and we can see that we've got sort of a baseline chart here that looks somewhat like the scatterplot chart that we've got for Sanderson Farms above. There's a

few things we need to do to tidy this up though. The first which is move our X

and Y axes to the edges of the chart. So we want the Y axis that's in the center

here over to the left and the X axis in the center here over to the left and the x-axis in the center here down to the bottom.

So to do that I'm going to double click the y-axis first, go to labels on the right hand side in this format axis panel and choose label position as low.

Then we're going to do exactly the same thing for our x-axis, so double click that with a label.

in this format axis panel I'm going to so format axis panel within the axis options tab I should say

I'm going to go to the labels section and choose label position as low again. Okay so that's looking

quite a lot better. Another thing I think that we should probably do is increase the text size of

these x and y labels so I'm going to click on the y axis again

go to home on the ribbon and just knock up the text size probably to 10 points

for this one and the same for our x axis as well. Okay next what we'll do is edit

our observation points themselves. So at the moment they're just all kind of opaque blue circles and you can see in the chart

above standards and farms they're kind of a slightly transparent circle with a border

around them.

And the reason why I quite like showing dot plots with a sort of transparent center in

the markers is just so that you can kind of see when there's loads and

loads of them piled on top of each other because the color becomes very opaque so you can kind of

see where the data is really concentrated. So let's do that now with this series here so I'm

just going to click on that series so any of those data points and then in the format data series

panel on the right hand side go to fill and line, choose the marker options down here. This is fine actually marker options can stay

as circles but if we go to the fill section of this tab then we're going to

choose solid fill and just make the transparency instead of 0% 50% and you

can see that that's changed the

sort of transparency of all of those markers in that chart already. Then I'm

going to go to the border section, click solid line, press ok to making these

changes as we're going and make the border just the same color basically and

keep the transparency as 0. So that's fine, that's

basically all I wanted to do there and now the chart's looking pretty good. We've pretty much

done everything that we need to do in terms of aesthetics. We now need to move on to plotting

the kind of regression line, the line of best fit that goes through all of this data and also the

regression equation that goes with it. So to do that I'm selecting this chart again and I'm going

to go to chart design on the ribbon add chart element, choose trend line and linear trend line.

That's going to add a blue dotted line and if I double click on that blue dotted line we can then

format that. I'm going to format it to a solid line that is black in color instead so it's a bit easier to see on the background of all those blue data points.

And then within this panel I can choose the trendline options tab at the top right here and click on the top right here.

choose to display the equation of that line on the chart and the R squared value as well.

So I've just ticked those two checkboxes here and you can see that the equation R squared

value has appeared there. I'm just going to click and drag, left click and drag that to

the top right so it's in the same position as we have it for Sanderson Farms. And then

on the home tab of the ribbon just increase the text size again so we can

see that a bit more easily. Okay so that's our scatterplot chart done for

Fluor Corporation and we've added a simple linear regression line with the

equation defined in the top right. Now is probably a good time to mention what

the R squared number is all about as well. Basically that's a measure of how well the

linear model explains all of the data. So if the value is 1 it would explain all of the data perfectly

and in this way it's pretty much the same as what we saw with values of correlation in the previous

video. The greater the dispersion around the line the weaker the model. I include these numbers

really only as a reference.

They don't necessarily affect the value that we take for beta since we know we're only estimating

that based on the data that we have anyway. However, I do think it's interesting to get a basic

understanding of how well the model predicts or fits the data. Anyway, with that scatter plot

chart done, we can see the regression

equation we have to explain floor corporations returns is 1.3999 times the

market return minus 0.0012. From that we know that the

gradient of the line and hence our beta value for fluor cooperation is at 1.3999 or let's just call it 1.4.

Let's note down our two lifetime beta values from the stocks that we're looking

at now and I say lifetime beta because the beta values that we've estimated

here are based on all of the available data

that we have for these stocks going back in history.

So in cell V10, I'm going to type lifetime beta. And in the cell below that, V11, I'm going to type equals 0.5656 or just 0.5656, which is the beta value we have calculated for Sanderson Farms. Then I'm going to do the

same for Fluor Corporation now. So in cell V29 I'm typing lifetime beta and in V30 I'm typing in

1.3999. And before we go any further let's think about these two beta estimates that we've got and whether they actually add up with our expectations.

Sanderson Farms is a poultry company and that's clearly in the food processing sector.

Chickens, obviously, are very staple consumer good and so we'd expect there to be demand for

chicken irrelevant of what's going on in the broader economic cycles of both the US and the

rest of the world. So from that perspective, I think a beta estimation of well below one

makes a lot of sense. And so I'm not too worried about significant error in that estimation purely

based on economic logic in this instance. Equally, Fluor Corporation is an engineering business

providing sort of procurement, construction and fabrication services worldwide with large segments in energy, chemicals, mining and industrials. to the economic cycle based on the fact that demand tends to fluctuate in those areas based on

willingness to invest and also sort of liquidity considerations amongst other things. So again this

beta estimation of about 1.4 makes sense again and it sort of shows that company profits and hence

returns are cyclical and more sensitive to the market as a whole. Now you'll be pleased to know you don't

have to go through the process of building a scatterplot chart every time you want to obtain

a beta value. There are a couple of much quicker ways. That being said I did think it would be

useful to go through that charting process as you might find some of the techniques and ideas

discussed useful in other applications as I said earlier. So let me show you a

quicker method now to calculate beta by simply using a built-in Excel function

called the slope function. So let's assume we want to calculate the two-year

beta for Sanderson Farms. In cell V13 I'm going to type two-year beta and in the

cell below V14 I'm going to type in a

formula which is =slope and within the slope function you can see we have two

parameters to define. This is just like we covered previously with correlation.

We need to reference two arrays, one for our y values and one for our x values.

And like I said when it comes to beta our y values are

always the stock returns and our x values are always the market returns and as with our correlation

calculations in the previous video the reference arrays must be the same length and over the same

period as well. So in this instance we want a two-year beta calculation. So we need to select data from row two down to row 106

for both columns F, the Sanderson farm returns,

and column E, which contain our market returns.

That means the first array reference is F2 to F106,

and the second one after a comma is inserted is E2 to E106.

When we close the brackets and press enter here, we can see that the calculation returns 0.45

and that is our two-year beta estimate for Sanderson Farms.

Clearly, that estimate is a little bit below our previous lifetime estimation

when we use the entire data set available.

Again, this takes me back to some of the things I said in the previous video regarding the reliability of statistical estimates.

They're by no means perfect and they are going to vary depending on the underlying data used.

The time window that you use to estimate things like beta and correlation depends on the logic that you want to use and potentially the availability of the data in the first place.

that you want to use and potentially the availability of the data in the first place.

I think whenever you're making a decision on the observational data that you're using for your analysis, always remember the goal of your analysis in the first place. So for beta and correlation,

we want to use data that we think will give us the best estimate of what those values will be

in the future. Usually that means finding a balance between using the most

recent data, which arguably better reflects the current economic environment for the firm,

whilst also making sure that there's enough data points to enable statistical rigor.

When it comes to beta, industry standards vary between using sort of two to five years of data

on either monthly or weekly frequencies but I would argue that really

you should be using weekly frequencies over any time up to the sort of five-year time horizon.

For the most part lifetime values are not used since both the sort of company and economic

conditions have likely changed over that kind of length of period. So with that being said let's calculate the three

and five year beta now quickly for Sanderson Farms. So in cell W13 I'm typing three year beta

and in the cell below that I'm going to type equals slope open brackets and then I'm going to choose

Sanderson Farm returns going back three years so

from F2 to F158 followed by a comma followed by selecting our market returns

over the same period so that's E2 to E158 and I'm just typing this in because

it's a little bit easier than sort of selecting to the correct row in this case

and then close brackets press enter and then we'll move on to the five-year beta. So in x13 I'm going to type

five-year beta and in the cell below x14 I'm going to type

equals slope, open brackets. This time I'm using five years of weekly returns data for

each data series. So we're going to choose from f2 to f262 for Sanderson

farm returns and in the second parameter e2 to F262 for Sanderson Farm returns and in the second

parameter E2 to E262 for market returns and then close brackets and press enter. So we can see here

from these calculations that the three and five year betas for Sanderson Farms are 0.49 and 0.5

respectively. The values over all of these time frames, lifetime included, are actually

pretty close and in line with what we would say our economic logic is for this stock so there's

definitely no sort of red flags here. One thing I would say though is that you definitely don't want to get bogged down in the

kind of decimal places and sort of accuracy to multiple decimal places of beta when calculating

it in various ways. Any one of these calculations will actually be good enough to use, so don't worry

too much about that stuff. What I do want to show you though, and this is really for those of you

that are more statistically minded and perhaps thinking of going into industry is an additional statistic that gives

us an idea of the statistical accuracy of the beta measure itself. And I'm not going to go

through this in detail because it is really beyond the scope of this course, but you guys

will be able to look it up afterwards if you want to. And like I said, it might be useful

for some of you that are thinking of entering industry. So in cell V16 I'm going to

type beta space SE which stands for beta standard error. Now standard error statistics are a little

bit like standard deviations but they can apply to error terms in statistical estimates. So basically

the value we calculate for it effectively gives us a volatility for our beta estimate.

And if we assume the error terms are normally distributed, then we can apply certain probabilities to ranges of beta.

So let's calculate the beta standard error now then in cell W16.

The formula that I'm going to use here is a long one and it's not necessary to explain. Like I said

I just want to show you quickly how you can obtain the beta standard error without dwelling too much

on it and you can always explore it more in your own time if you want to. So the formula is and equals index open brackets lin est so l-i-n-e-s-t open brackets again f2 to f106 okay we're looking

at a two-year beta here two-year beta standard error i should say followed by a comma the second

parameter here is going to be e2 to e106 followed by comma 1 comma 1 close brackets comma 2 comma 1 close brackets. Now you might be

thinking here what on earth is that equation? Like I said I don't really have time to go into the

formula and how it works. You're going to have to take my word for it that this does return the beta

standard error. You can of course look up this sort of formula in your own time and also

more about a beta standard error if you want to like I said before. But anyway you can see here

that the standard error value that we obtain is roughly 0.15. So if we assume that our errors are

normally distributed then what we can say things like there is a 68% chance that the true beta lies within one standard error of our estimation

meaning 0.45 plus or minus 0.15 which is our two year beta estimate with a range of 0.15 either side of it. So one standard error either side of it.

Alternatively, we can also say there is a 95% chance that the true beta lies between 0.45 plus or minus 0.3, which is two times the standard error around the two year estimate.

It's irrelevant for retail trading application.

That is just a small little segment I wanted to add for those of you that are more statistically minded or just interested in learning more about this sort of stuff.

It's not worth me spending any more time on because explaining it just isn't worth the marginal benefit of doing so.

Really, all that matters is your estimates of beta itself and not particularly worrying about the errors in the estimates themselves too much.

Just being aware that, you know, beta estimates are subject to error.

That being said, there is one more thing I briefly want to mention about how beta estimates can be adjusted, which is something that's sometimes used in industry. So sometimes a formula is used to smooth out estimates of beta

by multiplying them by two thirds and adding one third of the market beta.

The reason behind that is that in the past, over long periods of time,

companies' beta values have tended towards the market beta of one.

And not only is there some statistical evidence of this,

but also some economic theory underpinning it, which is simply that as businesses grow and mature,

their revenues and profits gradually diversify to the point where the company starts behaving

like the average market firm. There is also some intuitive statistical rationale behind this adjusted beta measure which is

that given the average market firm has a beta of 1, our best estimate of any randomly picked

firm's beta should be 1 as well before doing any other calculations. So therefore the sort

of weighted approach of combining our best estimate of beta which is one with our calculated beta

estimation aims to reduce error on the basis of those factors. The split in weightings of two

thirds to one third is based purely on empirical evidence of the trend of thousands of companies

beta over time using past data. Now I'm not going to prove any of that so again you'll have to take my word for it

but that sort of evidence does exist. Now my counter argument to using adjusted beta

in our circumstances anyway is that as traders we're never seeking to take positions for long

periods of time so we don't need to be concerned with long drawn out changes in estimations based on kind of glacial shifts in company dynamics.

So that being said, I don't think it's going to make a huge difference whichever way you measure beta on an individual asset basis.

You can argue it in different ways. And really what I aim to do here.

here is give you some supplementary information to increase your knowledge and then the path that you

choose is up to you. You can choose to ignore the additional information on beta error and adjusted

beta that I've just given or look into it further and potentially use it or for you guys thinking

about industry obviously you can take note of it and bring it up where appropriate on your career

path. For most of you I don't think it's going to make a difference. Again,

I would say some of this stuff is relevant for those of you going into industry, but that's about

it. Okay, so I'm not going to go into the process of calculating two, three and five year betas for

Fluor Corporation because it's just exactly the same methodology as we used just now and you guys

understand how to do that by now I'm sure. I will make sure to include it in the download file though

and we are about to calculate those same values anyway in the next sheet for a slightly different

purpose. Okay let's now take a quick look at the next sheet which is a beta time series sheet.

In a way there's nothing new here.

What you can see here is the S&P 500 and floor corporation returns along with a rolling calculation

for two and three year betas.

Now these rolling calculations are run in exactly the same way as I ran rolling correlations

in the previous video. But that being said,

because we are using a slightly different function here to do it, I am going to quickly go through the

process again for a 5 year rolling beta instead which we can then add to the chart and I'll

comment on it. So to calculate the rolling 5 year beta of Fluor Corporation all we do is use the

slope function on the returns of FLR and the S&P500

index over five year time windows running from the most current data back as far as possible.

So in cell H1 I'm going to head the column five year rolling beta and in the cell below H2 I'm

going to type equals slope open brackets E2 to e262 as the first parameter array

and a comma and then the second parameter array will be the range d2 to d262

then close brackets. That defines our y observations as FluorCorp returns over the last five years

so 260 weekly rows and our x values are S&P 500 returns over the same time frame. Once that cell's

inputted we can copy down the formula to row 1905. The reason being that row 1905 is the last row here

is that the calculation, that's the last sort of row that the calculation can still make use of

five years of returns data in the previous rows, so the rows below.

So now that we have our rolling five-year beta estimates, let's plot them in the chart to see

how they compare with our two-year and three-year estimates. To do that,

that I'm going to select the chart and right click in the chart and choose select data and

then we're going to add a series. The series name is just going to be set to whatever's in

cell H1 so it's our five year beta estimate and the series values are going to be from

H2 to H2061. Okay so that's our rolling five-year beta estimates from row 2 to row 2061.

And the reason why we're selecting an array down to that row instead of row 1905 which is actually

where the data ends in that column is that we need all of our data series that we're referencing

in the chart to be the same length which in this case is set to be equal to the longest data series that's referenced, which

is our two-year rolling beta series. Okay, now that we've got our five-year rolling beta

estimations added to our chart, let's take a quick look at it. Basically, what we can

see and conclude here is again similar to the comments I gave in

the previous video about rolling correlations. Firstly, it's pretty clear that beta estimates

can change and sometimes quite significantly, so that is something that of course we need

to be aware of whenever we're using beta estimates. Now I already mentioned the positives

and negatives of using shorter and more recent time windows for

beta calculations compared to longer windows so I'm not going to comment on that again but what I

will say is that we can see from the chart here that long time windows or longer time windows

clearly look less volatile than shorter time periods but equally they're less responsive

in times of change. Now each stock you look at will have a

different profile in terms of rolling betas and some will be more volatile and change more than others.

And as I said before, I think whenever you're choosing the underlying data for your estimation of

beta there is no right answer. You should just kind of strive to use a time window that makes

logical sense to you considering that

you want a forward-looking estimate. So for example you should think through questions like

is your beta estimation based on enough data? Is the data recent enough to reflect the current

position of the firm and economic conditions? Does the data incorporate old and stale data that perhaps isn't relevant now

is the period that you're grabbing data from on the whole reflective of what we think conditions will be like over the period that we're looking to trade the stock and I guess actually that's the that's the big one that you need to think about.

Like I said previously and you can use this as a guide, industry practice

is to typically use two to five year beta values, that is calculating beta from the most recent

two to five year returns data. Now don't panic yourself

too much about all of that you know choosing what time period to use because like I kind of said

before the variation in beta estimates that you get might be quite small anyway and you know the

most important thing really is that you actually know how to run your own beta calculations and

that you understand them so that you can then apply them.

And speaking of application, so far all I've really told you in terms of how beta can be used is

understanding whether a stock is likely to be economically sensitive or not and perhaps whether

it can be defined as a cyclical or defensive stock. Now it's about time we looked at some more concrete

uses of beta and we're

going to do that now by looking at beta at the portfolio level. Okay so let's go

over to the portfolio beta sheet now and this is where things become a lot more

interesting. Before I go through the sheet in more detail as a bit of an

overview portfolio beta is basically calculated by summing the weighted beta

of all its constituents, where the weighted beta for each position is its net weight in the portfolio

multiplied by its beta. Now all the same rules of analysing beta apply in the same way at the

portfolio level as they did at the stock level. And by that I mean it still represents the change in portfolio returns

you can expect for a unit or from a unit change in the market. So for example a portfolio beta of one

suggests if the market goes up by one percent your portfolio will also go up by one percent

but more important than worrying about the specific percentage moves in your portfolio

than worrying about the specific percentage moves in your portfolio is being able to have a general understanding of the exposure your portfolio has to the market. When you run a long short portfolio

you should always have an opinion on the market as a whole and that's what the sort of macro analysis

section in this video series is all about and it naturally kind of dictates whether you want your

portfolio to be net long, net short or market neutral. When it comes to portfolio beta a value

of greater than zero represents a long bias, less than zero represents a short bias and zero itself

is market neutral. Now prior to this you might have just been thinking that your net cash exposure that is your

dollar exposure of your longs minus your shorts would represent whether your portfolio is long short or

neutral to the market. Now don't get me wrong that is worth monitoring but the problem with that method

is that it doesn't take account for the risk or volatility of the portfolio's constituents.

Portfolio beta is a much more accurate way to understand your exposure to the market as a whole

than just your net dollar exposure. For example, putting on $50,000 into short positions

and $50,000 into long positions means you're dollar neutral, but you might not actually have

market neutral exposure once you account for the risk and volatility in your positions

as measured by beta values. Let's make things simple here in an example so I can make myself

clear. Let's say you allocated $50,000 to the long and short size of your portfolio but your longs all have

beta values of 2 and your shorts have beta values of 0.5. If the market moves down 1%

then your longs are estimated to lose 2% or $1,000 and your shorts are only estimated

to gain 0.5% or $250. That's a net loss of $750 or 0.75% in the portfolio purely based on market

movements which doesn't sound very market neutral does it? That should provide the key motivation

really for understanding your portfolio beta. It's very important to have an idea of how your portfolio

is positioned in terms of being net long, net short or market neutral so that you can make sure that it aligns with your

fundamental predisposition in the sort of macro analysis that you do. And by the way, if you have

been sort of put off so far with the sort of fact that beta estimates can vary quite significantly

and are prone to error don't be

for this because at the portfolio level the error is much much tighter and so portfolio beta measures

tend to be more accurate than individual stock betas themselves and there is statistical proof

of that fact but it's not worth going into in this video and so again you're just going to have to

take my word for that. Now obviously these estimates of beta at the portfolio level still aren't perfect

but what I'm saying here is that they are more accurate than estimates at the asset level.

Okay so that's the goal of this sheet. Calculating and understanding your portfolio beta so that you can position yourself appropriately

based on your fundamental views and your conviction in those views. As well as monitoring portfolio beta to understand your exposure to the market, this sheet

will also give you more of an understanding about which of your portfolio positions carry more or

less risk than others. And monitoring these aspects should then be checked against your own fundamental

views and convictions and

then adjustments should be made accordingly if the portfolio structure

isn't balanced in the way that you'd like it to be. So let me walk you through

this sheet piece by piece now. As in the spreadsheets I've used in the previous

videos the only cells you need to edit in this sheet are the orange ones and

they help define the

positions in your portfolio and the allocation to them. The rest of the cells are all calculation

cells and so shouldn't be edited. In terms of the layout we've got here,

the top section from rows 1 to 15 represent the long size of

of the portfolio and the section below from rows 16 to 30 represent the short side of the

portfolio. Beyond that, right at the bottom, there's an aggregate section for the total portfolio.

Working from left to right now, I've split the sheet into two sections. The blue section holds

user inputs and calculation values that represent the current portfolio situation or the one being modeled at least and on the right hand side there is a green section that

represents potential target scenarios such as risk parity, beta parity and

equal weighting and I'm going to talk about those shortly. So let me briefly run

through the user inputs in this sheet. In columns A and B you can fill in the company name

and ticker for each portfolio position that you have. In column C you need to enter a value of

beta for each position which can be calculated in any of the ways that we've sort of looked at in the

first section of this video. Beyond that in columns D and, the current price and number of shares held in each stock should be entered.

And finally, if you're looking to use any of the target scenarios in the green section, you'll need to enter your dollar target gross exposure in cell J33.

So that value should basically be the gross exposure you want for the entire portfolio, which is the sum of the gross value of all your positions

added together. That isn't the same as your margin though by the way because you may well run a

leverage portfolio where the overall value of positions you hold is greater than your total margin.

If you're confused about that then hopefully it will become clear when we go through the calculation

cells in the rest of the sheet. So before I move

on to looking at the calculation cells in more detail let's consider the portfolio scenario

I've set up here currently. It should look pretty familiar to you guys because it's the same long

short portfolio from the previous videos. I've calculated beta values for each of these stocks

and obtained their current prices as of the time of filming and so all that's left here to do is allocate some shares to each one. Now if you remember back to

this portfolio scenario in the previous videos we assumed an allocation of $10,000 to each position.

In reality you can't just choose to allocate a nice round number like that to a certain stock

and assume that it's going to be

possible because positions need to be built up by being long or short a number of shares,

each of which carry a certain price. So only if the share price is a divisor of $10,000,

would you be able to allocate $10,000 to a position nice and neatly. However, of course,

what we can do is go long or short the number of shares that

gets us closest to an overall exposure of $10,000 for each position, which is what we're going to do

now. So the way we do this is just by dividing the allocation to each position by

by the share price and rounding it to the nearest whole number. So for example for the VTRS position

here let's use a formula to calculate that in cell E3 and that formula is just going to be

equals round open brackets 10,000 divided by D3, cell D3 comma zero close brackets.

What this formula does is use the function round to round a certain value to a desired number of decimal places. So inside the round function, the first parameter is the number

that you want to round. So in this case, that is 10,000 because we're looking to allocate

$10,000 divided by the current share price in cell D3 and the second parameter is the number

of decimal places that we want to round to. And assuming we don't have access to fractional shares

here what we need to do is round the number of shares to the nearest whole number which means

the number of decimal places required is zero. So hopefully that makes sense. And you can see

zero. So hopefully that makes sense. And you can see when we enter that formula, the number of shares required for this position is 725. Now, instead of running that formula for all 10 positions,

I've actually created an automatic target scenario in the green section, which tells you how many

shares are required in each position to achieve an equal dollar weighting across all of the positions in the portfolio. All you need to do is make sure that you have a target portfolio gross

exposure set in cell J33. So we know for this portfolio that we've got 10 positions each with

a value of $10,000 roughly and so we're kind of targeting a total portfolio exposure of $100,000.

And you can see here that I've already entered that value into J33 and so if we

take a look at column N now you can see the number of shares required in every

position to achieve equal dollar weightings. From there if we want to

implement that in our portfolio model we can just copy across those values into

column E which I'm going to do here in turn for both the long and short sides of the portfolio. Now when

you do this you must make sure you paste the cells as values into column E. We don't want to copy

across the formulas from column N just the output values themselves. So as we've done before this is just done by right clicking in the cells you want to copy down or sorry selecting the cells that you want to copy and pressing control C or right clicking and clicking copy and then right clicking the cell you want to copy down from and selecting paste as values as the option from the menu which is the clipboard

option with the 123 on it. When we do that for both the long and the short positions,

you can see that all of our calculation cells in columns F to I have populated. So let's

move on to what those mean now. In column F we've got a calculation for dollar net exposure in each

position. That is simply just the current price of each position multiplied by the number of shares

multiplied by one for longs and minus one for shorts. Column G calculates the gross exposure

for each position and is almost exactly the same. The only difference here is that it doesn't adjust for long or short

positions so you can see here in both columns F and G that we've achieved an

almost equal dollar exposure to all of our positions based on the number of

shares inputted for each stock in column E. It isn't exact of course because

we've got rounding issues as I mentioned

before but it is close. Now in column H we have the net weight of each position in the

total portfolio. This is the net exposure for each position divided by the total gross exposure

in the entire portfolio and again this shows that we've pretty much got

identical dollar percentage weightings across the board.

And finally, in column I, I've calculated what is called

the net weighted beta for each position

as a contribution to the total portfolio.

These numbers are computed by taking the net weight

of each position multiplied by its beta.

And when you add all of these values together you get the overall value for portfolio beta.

And so by definition when taken individually they give you an idea of where risk is skewed

to in the portfolio. So for example since the values are a function of betas and weightings

we know that a relatively large value for net

weighted beta in a certain position means that either one or both of the allocation to that

position or the beta of that position is large and by definition that in turn suggests that the risk

carried in that trade or that position is also large. Okay so let's now look at the aggregated calculations for these columns.

Cells F15 and F30 show the dollar net exposure for the long and short sides of the portfolio

respectively and when you add them together you get the total dollar net exposure in the

portfolio which in this case is around $20,000 seen in cell F33. That makes sense because we've got six long positions all targeting

a ten thousand dollar net exposure and four short positions each targeting a minus ten thousand

dollar net exposure and so when you sort of add all of that together you get a value of twenty

thousand dollars overall. Similar calculations are run at the aggregate level for gross exposure

in the adjacent cells and in this case we see roughly $60,000 of exposure on the long side and

almost $40,000 on the short side which taken together equates to nearly $100,000 total gross exposure

for the portfolio. In cells H15, H30 and H33 we have aggregation cells that

translate the net exposures from column F into percentage weightings by dividing

them by the total gross exposure of the portfolio. Effectively these cells show

you the percentage weighting in dollar terms assigned to the long and short

sides of the portfolio and again when these are summed together you get the dollar net weight at the long and short sides of the portfolio. And again, when these

are summed together, you get the dollar net weight at the portfolio level, which tells you whether

you're long or short biased in terms of dollar exposure and how much as a percentage of total

gross exposure. That same output can also be achieved simply by dividing the total net exposure

by the total gross exposure exposure if that makes more sense

to you. Finally in column I we have aggregations of weighted beta. Cell I33 is probably the most

important cell in the sheet because it tells you the beta of your portfolio given all of the other

inputs you've defined and we can see this portfolio structure has a beta of 0.3

which suggests it's net long the market and we could estimate that if the market increased by

say 10% our portfolio would increase by around 3%. That might sound boring to you but running a long

short portfolio usually means you're hedged against the market movements at least partially

and so it's very likely that you're always going to the market movements at least partially and so it's

very likely that you're always going to have a beta somewhere between one and minus one and I would

expect that even more likely is that that value will be somewhere between 0.5 and minus 0.5.

As I said in previous videos though it doesn't necessarily mean that you should expect less

return than the market for many reasons such as

you know the ability for this long short strategy to perform in all market conditions as well as

things like use of leverage and of course your ability as a good trader to generate alpha in each

sort of trade idea meaning your ability to obtain excess returns over that which is expected for

each position given its beta value and the

market fluctuations. I'll talk a little bit more about that later in the course when we get to

performance metrics. Speaking of leverage again though, if we take this portfolio as an example,

if you have put these positions on only using say $20,000 of margin, then you're effectively

five times levered since the gross exposure of the portfolio is $20,000 of margin, then you're effectively five times levered since the gross

exposure of the portfolio is $100,000. So a 3% move in your portfolio then would equate to a 15%

move in your total account margin. Now I know that under current rules gaining that sort of leverage,

at least in the US, isn't possible unless you're kind of using options or futures but you

get the idea of what I mean here. The reason we build long short portfolios is to create a strategy

that can succeed and build wealth in all conditions and it also takes advantage of

things like low correlations and so in turn

it achieves better risk reward dynamics and that strategy can always then be levered up

using various financial products to get closer to the kind of returns that you want to achieve.

Anyway, I don't want to dwell too much on leverage since we talk about it in other areas of the

course. Okay, so as well as beta being useful to gauge the overall market exposure your portfolio is carrying,

we can also see how positions are contributing to the value of portfolio beta. So in this scenario,

on the long side, we can see that XPO is carrying over 2.5 times as much risk as TTC,

since its value for net weighted beta is over 2.5 times as large. And if we look at why that might be

the case, we know that the dollar weightings in the positions of this portfolio are fairly even.

And so the additional risk with XPO must come from its value of beta. And when we look across,

we can see that that's true. XPO's beta measures high at about 2.17 whilst TTC is quite low at 0.83. So

the profit and loss in the XPO position is likely likely to be much more volatile purely based on

market fluctuations which is why we attribute more risk to the trade as it stands. Now that isn't necessarily a bad thing it's all

really down to the sort of conviction level that you have for each of your ideas and I'll come back

to that in a little bit. Now on the short side of things it's looking a little bit more even.

All the net weighted betas are ranging between minus 0.155 and -0.121 and so by that logic the risk

is fairly evenly distributed across those positions.

Okay so hopefully you now understand a bit more about what net exposure is, what gross

exposure is, how portfolio beta is calculated and also how it can be analyzed both in terms of

portfolio exposure and understanding the distribution of risk between positions in the portfolio.

With that in mind let's talk through a few scenarios now and I'll discuss how you can use

some of the functionality I've built in the green section of this sheet while we're at it.

So first things first for the current setup we have,

I've already showed you how you can use column N to identify the shares required to reach equal

dollar weightings in each position. However, now we've implemented those weightings into the

portfolio, we can see that risk is distributed unevenly across all of our positions based on

our net weighted beta calculations.

Let's say now that for whatever reason we want to fix that and assign an even amount of risk based on values of beta to every single position in the portfolio.

This is a scenario calculation that I've made in columns J and K.

and I've called this scenario risk parity. And by the way, there are many professional firms that

actually run this kind of sort of position sizing strategy, although granted this is a much more

simplified version of it. So column J uses a fairly complex formula to calculate the gross

percentage weight required in each position to achieve this and then column K uses whatever target gross exposure you

set in cell J33 to calculate the number of shares in each position required to achieve those weightings.

So let's have a look at what happens when we copy those share values across into the portfolio now.

For our long positions I'm just going to copy cells K3 to K14 and paste them as values into cell E3 by

right clicking within that cell and choosing the paste as values option from the menu. Again I

want to stress that for this procedure you do need to copy and paste the cells as values otherwise

the spreadsheet won't work. After doing that I'm just going to do exactly the same for the short side of the portfolio.

Okay let's have a look at what's happened here. If we start in columns F2H we can see that the dollar allocations to every position has changed and they're no longer even. Lower beta stocks

have higher exposures and vice versa in order to distribute risk evenly. By assessing the values in column I, we can see that this has

been achieved quite well since every position has almost exactly the same value of weighted beta.

If we take a look at our dollar net exposure and our portfolio beta, we're still net long by both

accounts. So what have we actually done here? Well, all this strategy does

is basically define the risk for each stock based on its value of beta and then assign a percentage

allocation to each position so that the weighted risk of each position becomes the same across the

whole portfolio. If we had the same number of longs and shorts in the portfolio, this would mean we have a market

neutral portfolio in beta terms, i.e. a portfolio beta of 0. But in this case, we have more longs

and shorts, so the portfolio beta is still net long, measuring 0.27. So the next question is,

is this useful to us? And my answer to that is yes and no. It's useful to act as a starting point

for position sizing but logically to keep these weightings you would have to say that you have

exactly the same level of conviction for every trade. The reality is that that's going to be

very unlikely. You're always going to have stronger and weaker fundamental theses and these convictions will change based on price action as well.

Now aside from ignoring conviction, another downside of this strategy is that the only way you can actually control portfolio beta and hence market exposure is by either adding or removing positions.

than adjusting weightings. Now we can improve on this slightly by looking at

columns L and M which model a scenario I have called beta parity. In this model

the weightings are risk adjusted in each side of the portfolio rather than the

portfolio as a whole in order to achieve beta neutrality at the portfolio

level meaning a portfolio beta of zero. So in column L the gross weightings are

worked out in order to risk adjust all the weightings on the long side. In this column the

weightings are worked out in two sections so all the long weightings add up to 100% and all the

short weightings add up to 100% as well rather than the combination of both sets of weightings

summing to 100% as per you know we saw in the risk parity model sets of weightings summing to 100% as per risk parity model.

Those weightings are then used to calculate the number of shares required for a portfolio with

the target exposure set in cell J33. If I copy those values into the portfolio now, you can see

that market neutrality is achieved with a portfolio beta close to zero. And as it happens, the way this

calculation works also means that dollar neutrality is achieved as well. Now, obviously, portfolio

beta and the net dollar weight in the portfolio aren't zero exactly, but that's purely due to

kind of rounding and the fact that we can't buy fractional shares, as I've mentioned before.

purely due to rounding and the fact that we can't buy fractional shares as I've mentioned before.

Now I think this is a slightly better scenario model to work from as a baseline for positioning in the portfolio since it starts with the assumption of market neutrality and risk parity

within each side of the portfolio, both the long and short sides. Now really these scenario models are there just as kind of head checks and guides to show you

what your portfolio would look like if all you had were some position ideas but no real conviction

about the market direction or which ideas were better than others. The reality is that you should

have a fundamental view on the market and you should have trades

and ideas that you have varying levels of conviction for because that's only natural.

So to that end and to conclude the video, I'm not trying to persuade you by any means

that you should be creating a risk or beta parity strategy in your portfolios. Those

are just interesting kind of baseline scenarios

from which to work from,

and I use them to help explain

how this portfolio beta model works.

What you really should be using this sheet for

is primarily monitoring your current portfolio

and modeling any changes you're thinking of making.

And when monitoring your portfolio,

you're looking for a few

things. Firstly, at the portfolio level, you want to know what your net dollar exposure is and weight

is, and also your portfolio beta. The beta value is the most important here because it's going to

idea as to whether your portfolio truly is net long short or neutral and by how much as well.

For most well-balanced long short portfolios I would expect beta to range from probably minus

0.3 to plus 0.3 but that range can widen if you're taking on a lot of leverage as I kind of

discussed before. You need to make sure that your portfolio

beta is in line with your fundamental outlook on the market as a whole and if it isn't then

adjustments will have to be made and that might mean adding more weight to certain stocks or

adding or subtracting entire positions as well. Drilling down from the sort of aggregate portfolio

level you should also be monitoring the relative

risk carried by each position through the net weighted beta calculations in column I.

And remember these values are added up to create the overall beta value for the portfolio and so

numbers with larger magnitudes whether positive or negative carry more risk. You need to make sure that you know what

positions are the ones that are carrying more relative market risk and also that you're happy for

that to be the case. Again if you aren't then you'll want to make some adjustments and a final point here

about monitoring your portfolio in this spreadsheet is that it goes without saying that even if you

keep the same positions for a long period of time, the prices of stocks and therefore weightings as

well as, you know, the estimations of beta will all move around. And so the sheet does need

continuous updating. And I would say that it's probably sensible to update this spreadsheet on

either a kind of weekly basis or perhaps every other week and the same actually goes for the spreadsheets that we've looked at in the last few videos as well. Now when you're

thinking of adding and subtracting positions from the portfolio you should model how this will affect

Portfolio Beta as a whole and use the information inside the sheet to aid decisions on weightings.

information inside this sheet to aid decisions on weightings. However, just like I said in the previous video, this shouldn't be your sole consideration when making structural changes

to the portfolio. All trades must first and foremost come from solid fundamental ideas with

good technical timing and that will help create a conviction for each and every position and that

is the kind of relative starting point really for

position weightings. After that you should overlay how that actually fits into the portfolio using

this spreadsheet and conduct a head check to see if you think the position and weighting choices

that you've made are sensible. Now I want to make a really important point here which I touched on earlier but it might not have been clear enough

Beta values represent the expected exposure of a position or a portfolio to market movements

But the returns of the position and the portfolio are driven by more than just broad market force

So when I say the market moves by 1%, if your portfolio beta is 1%, then you should expect your portfolio to move by 1% in the same direction.

That's true, but only from a market exposure point of view.

That's what would happen if your positions are kind of distinctly average.

If your ideas are high quality and generate alpha, that is, excess returns above those expected by market movements, then your portfolio should perform a lot better than whatever your beta value essentially predicts. Of course, we want to do this at an absolute minimum, but what we're really trying to target here are positions and portfolios that generate consistent absolute returns on top of alpha. So in our

portfolios, we basically want to accept some level of market risk, as we always want to have a view

on the market as a whole, whether long or short. We want to make outsized returns above market

expectations predicted by beta, both on the way up and the way down. But when we outperform on the way down,

we want to try and make sure that outperformance never translates to losses. So if the market goes

down by 10% and our beta adjusted performance is say minus 5%, we are outperforming the market,

but we're still losing money. We want to target absolute performance, meaning consistent positive returns, not just outperformance.

We also typically want to use a sensible or acceptable amount of leverage to magnify portfolio volatility or exposure,

and hence returns when markets go up and down.

This course is built to help you get outsized absolute returns.

This course is built to help you get outsized absolute returns. So don't think that your portfolio is hamstrung to perform in the way that your portfolio beta predicts because it isn't. Beta is just there to tell you your exposure to the general direction of the market, i.e. your market risk, and where risk lies in the portfolio, which aids with things like position sizing of individual trades and so on. It's

not there to predict your overall returns.

So that's the end of the video. I hope you guys got plenty from it because once you fully

get to grips with the concepts in this video and the last couple as well you're going

to have some really good knowledge and clarity about how to build high quality portfolio structures

and it should give your stats a really good boost over time as well.

So that's it from me and I'll see you later in the video series.