Hi guys and welcome to video 19, Portfolio Correlation. As I said in the previous video,

portfolio volatility and correlation are heavily linked and so there is going to be some overlap

between what was taught in the previous video and this one. But I do think it will be useful to kind

of reinforce some of the concepts to get a more in-depth understanding about correlation as a

whole. So as you can see in a break of tradition here I'm going to start with a

few PowerPoint slides in this video which will help me introduce the concept

of correlation to you guys more broadly and then we're going to take that

knowledge from the

presentation and move over to a spreadsheet model later which is just going to kind of build on what

we've covered in the previous video. With that being said let me formalize some of the questions

I'm hoping will be answered for you in this video. So we're going to cover what correlation is and how

it's useful to traders and portfolio managers.

We're going to look at why correlation is important to consider when constructing portfolios.

How traders and portfolio managers analyze and monitor correlations within portfolios by utilizing tools like Excel.

How correlation helps traders and portfolio managers make decisions to enable better

performance and also what are some of the common pitfalls and downsides in correlation analysis.

Before we get into the weeds of correlation analysis and building on the portfolio volatility

model we looked at in the last video,

you need to first understand what correlation actually is. And correlation is basically just a statistical measure that tries to quantify the extent to which two variables fluctuate together.

Or put simply, it tries to identify how the two variables are related in a linear fashion. There are various measures

of correlation but the most common is called the Pearson coefficient of correlation and when I talk

about correlation in this video or in the course in general this is really the statistical measure

that I'm referring to. The Pearson coefficient of correlation is a pairwise correlation value that

measures the linear relationship between two variables and I've got the formula up here

and that isn't something you need to worry about remembering but what is useful is just to have a

general understanding of how that formula works given that you're going to be calculating and using

correlation figures in the spreadsheets that we're looking at and providing to you to help monitor and manage your own portfolios.

So one of the major misunderstandings of correlation is that people think that if the two variables that they're looking at

both have positive changes in their data, it means that the relationship or correlation

between them must also be positive. And unfortunately, that's the incorrect assumption

to make. And in actual fact, what happens is that for every observation of both the x and y variables

that you're looking at, they're converted and normalized to values that represent their distances

from the mean. Not dissimilar actually

to the methodology that we looked at in the previous video with the standard deviation calculation.

Anyway those values are then compared to each other to compute an average relationship over

the entire data set and that number can then be interpreted to answer whether the variables

are positively or negatively related and also how strong that relationship is. Speaking of the

possible outputs of the correlation equation another thing you ought to know

is that correlation can take any value between 1 and -1 or 100% and minus 100%. A value of one or 100% represents a perfectly positive

linear relationship between two variables and a value of minus one which is the same as minus 100%

is a perfectly negative linear relationship. A correlation of zero suggests that the variables

that you're looking at are perfectly uncorrelated and there is no

linear relationship between them. However, that doesn't mean that the variables are independent

from each other because they could of course still have a relationship with each other that isn't

defined in a linear fashion. So let's have a look at some examples of what various levels of

correlation look like in

the form of scatterplot charts.

Now if you don't really understand what scatterplot charts are you don't need to worry about that

too much at the moment you'll soon figure it out from the next slide and then you can

obviously sort of rewind back to this slide if needed.

Essentially though all I'm trying to point out here at this stage is that if

there is an upward sloping relationship, so from bottom left to top right, between

the two variables then that represents a positive correlation and a downward

sloping relationship represents a negative correlation. The dispersion of

the plots represent the strength of the relationship and you can see

in the top row here the more dispersed the data points are the closer to zero the correlation

value becomes.

And the gradient or the slope of the data points is actually irrelevant to the strength of relationships.

The strength of relationships is defined by the dispersion as I said, not the gradient of the slope.

And you can see that in the bottom line of plots as well.

Okay, let's look at a real example now using real dispersion.

data that everyone's familiar with so that you can understand or at least everyone sort

of understands. What we're looking at here is a scatterplot showing the relationship

between Major League Baseball players' height and weight. Anecdotally, of course, we would

expect weight and height to have a positive relationship since taller people tend to be

heavier and vice versa. In this chart, height is measured in inches for each player and that's plotted on the x-axis

which is the horizontal axis and weight is measured in pounds for each player and that's plotted on

the y-axis which is the vertical axis. Each dot on the chart is a data point that has a value for

both height and weight and of course those dots represent the

major league baseball players from this sample of data. So what can we analyze from this chart? Well

first off we can see the heaviest player weighs in at around 290 pounds and the lightest players

weigh around 150 pounds. The tallest player measures 83 inches whilst the shortest players are around

67 inches. And you can see that a line of best fit has been drawn through all of these data points.

And formally this line is calculated by minimizing the distances between all of the data points in

the chart. But you can just think of this really as the sort of average relationship between the variables

height and weight. The majority of the data points that we can see are clustered in the middle of the

chart which makes perfect sense because most people obviously have a fairly average height and weight

by definition and if you know anything about normal distributions then that's going to make perfect sense to you. So anyway

when you calculate the correlation for this data it comes out as 0.53 which is quite a strong positive

linear relationship and you can see that reflected in the chart here. As players height sort of

deviates from the mean so does their weight in the same direction typically. So we have this

upward sloping relationship with not too much dispersion hence quite a strong correlation value

of 0.53. So now you have an understanding of what correlation is here's a few ways that

correlation analysis can be useful to traders and portfolio managers in general.

The first one is intermarket analysis okay that's monitoring market and economic relationships to sort of understand the current picture and where we might be headed as well as where opportunities

potentially exist. That's a little bit like the sort of stuff that we cover in the macro sections of this video series. It's also useful for hedging. Calculating relationships between assets can be sort of

helpful to reduce or hedge exposure in various ways. So it basically allows

traders to target more specific features in their returns profile. In the next video I'm going to

talk to you about beta which is actually sort of an extension really of correlation and a measure

which is used a lot by professional traders to hedge exposure in their portfolios. The third and final

useful sort of way to use correlation is through diversification and risk in the portfolio.

And really that's the most important use of correlation analysis. And that's our focus as

traders and portfolio managers. And I've talked about this in the previous video,

and we're going to carry on with that here. Now, you guys have seen this chart already,

and I talked through the principles behind

it in the previous video.

It is important though so I'm going to go through things briefly again here.

This chart really sums up why correlation between positions in your portfolio is so important

to consider.

It basically shows us the benefits of diversification or really what I like to call efficient diversification.

For those of you that don't know what diversification really means, it's basically the

process of pulling assets together that have diverse drivers or factors that affect their

values so that the risk of the whole portfolio is reduced. And as a reminder, in this chart, what we're looking

at are various portfolios where each colored line represents a different portfolio. And in each of

these portfolios, the constituent assets are assumed to have equal capital weightings, equal

volatility values, and equal pairwise correlations to all of the other positions in the portfolio. Obviously,

in reality, these assumptions are far-fetched, but they allow us to understand the theory

of portfolio diversification much more easily. What I'm really trying to show in this chart

is that there are two core factors that affect an equally weighted portfolio's volatility,

as you know. The volatility of the

assets in the portfolio and the correlations between those assets. Now knowing that the next

question we should have is well how much do each of these factors have an effect? And the answer

is that it depends on the size of the portfolio. What we can see in this chart is that as assets

are added to the portfolios

as long as the correlation of those positions is less than one the risk or volatility of the

portfolio falls quite significantly. The lower the correlation the more efficient the diversification

process becomes and the faster the risk decreases. So for example the blue and orange portfolios you can see both have

exactly the same asset volatility assumptions and so when there's only one asset in the portfolio

the volatility of the portfolio is the same 35% on an annualized basis. However

As assets are added to those portfolios, the volatility of the orange portfolio reduces at a much faster rate because the correlation values assumed between the constituents in that portfolio are set to 0.2 as opposed to 0.45 in the blue portfolio.

that question that I mentioned previously again. When portfolios contain just a very small number of assets, for example one or two, then the volatilities of the individual assets are quite

important to overall portfolio volatility. However, in any reasonably sized portfolio,

it's the correlation values that matter much, much more. And we did see this in the previous video when I was

looking at the variance covariance matrix and kind of running through examples there but you can also

see it in this chart here. So on that point you might be asking next whether it's a good idea to

continually add positions that have relatively low correlations to the portfolio

to keep reducing risk further and further. And as I've also said previously, the simple answer to

that is a resounding no. And that is for two main reasons. One of the primary measures of good

trading is achieving what's called good risk adjusted returns meaning your portfolio generates good

returns for relatively little risk over time and that can be measured in a few

ways. We've already touched on the Sharpe ratio and we're going to look at

that amongst some other performance metrics as well later in the series. If

you take a look at the chart here you'll see that there comes a point for every portfolio

where adding new positions doesn't really affect the overall portfolio volatility. The lower the

correlations are of the new positions the more risk is reduced but that being said the marginal

reduction in risk always diminishes with every new position. And there comes a point, usually between sort of

eight to 12 positions, sometimes a bit more, where there becomes very little benefit in terms of

reduced portfolio volatility. Bearing that in mind, let's think about the return side of our

risk-adjusted returns metrics. When building a portfolio, it's not unreasonable to think about the return side of our risk adjusted returns metrics. When building a portfolio,

it's not unreasonable to think that the number of high quality trade ideas anyone can come up with

is finite. High quality, high conviction ideas are the positions that generate the most returns

in your portfolios. And when you add more and more positions to the portfolio it's likely that the quality of

those ideas will diminish. So not only does adding more and more positions to the portfolio for the

sake of diversification have diminishing benefits in terms of risk reduction, it also reduces your

expected return.

This process is what's known as over diversification and it can dramatically decrease your portfolio

performance. Typically depending on the amount of capital you have to trade you're likely going to

be looking at having around 8 to 12 positions on at any one time in the portfolio. As I said in the

previous video that might increase a little bit depending on the sort of total capital you have available and obviously the sort of market situation and so on.

To summarise this slide, we can see how important efficient diversification and correlation is in our portfolios.

However, we do need to be cognisant of taking things too far.

However, we do need to be cognizant of taking things too far.

Always make sure that in your sort of prospective portfolios, positions are driven primarily by fundamental factors.

And only then should you think about correlation and portfolio construction.

And we'll talk more on that shortly.

OK, before going on to some practical spreadsheet stuff, I want to go through a few pitfalls of correlation analysis. And this isn't to put you off by any means, but it is there

to give you a deeper understanding of how correlation works and what you might need to

consider or look out for if you're using correlation values in your own analysis or portfolios.

you're using correlation values in your own analysis or portfolios. The first one we've already covered, over diversification can lead to lower returns both in sort of absolute and risk

adjusted terms. The second point I want to make is that correlation is not the same as causation.

What I mean by that is just because there might be a linear relationship between two variables, however strong

It doesn't mean that there is a cause and effect relationship between them

A change in one might not cause a change in the other

If there isn't a cause and effect relationship

Then without understanding the cause factor for a correlation

Then there is going to be uncertainty that the correlation will stay constant effect relationship then without understanding the cause factor for a correlation then there

is going to be uncertainty that the correlation will stay constant. If we think about the previous

video and our own portfolios that obviously has implications for using assumptions of covariance

or correlations in our model. We have to appreciate that these variables are all subject to change so that

doesn't make them redundant it just means we're trying to work with the data that we have available

but we need to be aware that that data isn't perfect. Ideally when it comes to building portfolios

it would be optimal to build them with positions that have very different fundamental

drivers so that we can try and assure that correlations remain low going forward. However,

it's impossible to know all of the factors that affect assets and

if you thought you could get close then they would probably change over time anyway. But

A classic example of how correlations can change over time is seen in the relationship between US

stocks and bonds. This chart here shows the rolling five-year correlation between 10-year treasury

prices and the S&P 500 which you can see pre-1998 was quite strongly positive but in the next five

years turned negative and has stayed that way ever since.

I'm not going to go into details as to why I think that's happened because it's besides the point, but what's noteworthy is that it has happened and it's a great example of how correlations can

break down or even invert. Next one, this might sound silly to you guys but correlation really is just a number.

It captures the linear relationship between two variables in a very specific way and based on the data in the sample that it's calculated from.

It's very easy to misinterpret and if you really want to understand the relationship between data

then you're going to have to do more than just look at some descriptive

statistics and correlations. And Anscombe's Quartet is a classic example of this. So Anscombe's Quartet

consists of four different data sets, all with the same core descriptive characteristics. They have the

same average, variance, correlations, regression

equations and so on which might make you think that these data sets are clearly very very similar.

However in this case you'd be wrong in that assumption and you can see here the differences

in the data sets are massive. The point here is that correlation like any other statistic is just

a number

And you need to understand when it's useful and when it isn't

And often to do that, you'll have to use other investigative methods to really understand the data itself

I mention that here really for two reasons

Firstly, to warn you of the limitations of certain statistics when taken in and of themselves. And secondly, to encourage you to go a little bit further

in your own work and analysis

because that's gonna give you more confidence

in the outcomes that you then reach.

Another very common mistake,

and one I mentioned earlier in the video,

is assuming that if two data sets are

trending in the same direction then their correlation must be positive and

vice versa. If you remember back to the equation it's calculated based on the

relative difference in each observation from the mean of the data set for each

variable but the means of each data set themselves could be very

different. So for example if the mean return of asset x is minus one percent and the mean return

of asset y is plus one percent over all observations but for every sort of

individual observation when asset x returns above the mean above minus one percent and asset y returns

above its mean above one percent then there will be a very strong positive correlation.

This concept is probably more easily illustrated through an example and here I've got a chart

showing the price of a real estate ETF, IYR is the ticker, versus an inverse real

estate ETF, REK, over the year 2020. And as you would sort of predict, the correlation of these

instruments is almost perfectly negative. It's minus 0.99. However, if you take the trend in

price of both of those funds over that year, they actually both go down. Meaning if you take the trend in price of both of those funds over that year they actually both go

down meaning if you bought both at the start of the year 2020 expecting a perfect hedge you would

have actually lost money on both sides of the trade despite a near perfect negative correlation.

The lesson here is remember that correlation works by comparing data points to the

means of the sort of x and y variables. So the means of the variables themselves can be very

different and still yield perfect correlations. The final pitfall that I want to talk about,

which I mentioned briefly earlier as well,

is common to many statistics. And that is that the calculation itself, the correlation, is dependent

obviously on the data set that's used and can of course vary for the same two variables by looking

at different samples. So for example, using different sort of time periods or frequencies of

data. We've seen what happens to the correlation of bonds and stocks already, but another very

important situation to look at is what happens in crises when liquidity dries up in the market,

for example. In this table below, I've calculated correlations between the S&P

500 and various other assets by first filtering the days on which the VIX is

at various levels to act as a proxy for liquidity levels and you can see that as

the VIX increases correlations across assets particularly in equities tends to

1 and this is actually a double whammy effect on your portfolio

volatility. Not only do individual asset volatilities increase but also correlations

magnify this effect at the portfolio level. Okay guys, now we've gone through some correlation

theory and understand some pitfalls of correlation values themselves, we're well

prepared to plow on and look at how

it can actually be useful to us.

And really, this is just going to build

on the spreadsheet stuff that

we looked at in the previous video.

So this spreadsheet is almost exactly

the same as the one that we looked at

previously with just a few extra bits added on. The main functionality that we're going to look at

is at the portfolio level in the portfolio volatility practice sheet again and I've made

a small addition to the model here for you guys this time which incorporates a portfolio correlation

table at the bottom of the sheet. I'm going to talk about how you can use that as sort of you're going through the process of building your

own portfolios or testing different scenarios and we'll go back and take a look at some of the

examples that we looked at in the previous video as well to get to grips with it all. Other than

that the only major difference in this sheet is that I'm going to use this correlation function

sheet to show you how to calculate

correlation values yourselves for any variables that you can get data for which may help you with

your own analysis given some of the ideas and things that we've been talking about in this video

and the last one. It's just really a sort of really useful tool to develop your understanding and we're going to go through

a worked example with a couple of stocks. There is one more new sheet which you'll see here

which is the variance covariance matrix sheet. That's just a massive covariance matrix which

I've built using all of the stocks that I've listed on the summary page and I just want

to make a quick reference to that at some stage in the video to illustrate a point. We'll get to that but first of all

I want to begin with showing you guys how to calculate correlation in Excel in

this correlation function sheet. Now as you can see here I've got some weekly

price data for WMS that ticker is Advanced Drainage Systems and OGS,

that's OneGas. This is exactly the same data that we have in the asset prices sheet for these two

stocks and it goes back as far as mid-2015 historically. And what we're going to do here

is calculate the correlation between these two stocks using three different samples of data.

Firstly I'm going to compute the correlation based on the entire six years of price data that we have

available here and then I'm going to calculate both the one and two year rolling correlations

and plot them in a chart so that you can see the difference. It's all pretty simple stuff really

and it involves a very similar methodology and once

we've kind of been through it hopefully you guys will be comfortable doing this sort of correlation

analysis and calculations yourselves. So when we calculate correlations we base it on returns

rather than prices and so to begin with we need to calculate all the weekly returns given our price

data and then we can move on to the correlation function itself. Now as you guys know by now calculating returns

is pretty easy and I'm just going to do that in columns D and E quickly. So we

just take the current price divided by the previous price minus one

that's our formula and then we copy down that formula for each stock in order to generate our

series of returns. As always when we do that we'll be left with errors at the beginning of the data

series since returns on a given date require prices from the previous period and at the start

of the series there's no previous period to look up prices for. So we just delete the contents

of those cells and our return series becomes one period shorter than our price series. So with

returns computed we can now look at calculating correlation. The function that we're going to use

here to calculate correlation in Excel is just called coral. So that's equals coral.

And if I type that in cell H1, you'll see that within the function there are two parameters to

assign. So equals coral open brackets. And we can see that there's two parameters to assign,

basically array one and array two. And these are just your references to your X and Y variable data sets.

So that's just going to be the returns for WMS and OGS in this example.

It doesn't matter which data series you enter first,

but here what I'm going to do is just select all of our WMS returns data

as the first parameter and then enter a comma to move on to array 2

and select all of the OGS returns data.

We're selecting all of the data available at this point

because we want to calculate the historic correlation

over the entire data set in this first example.

One thing to note here

when using the correlation function in Excel

is that you must always use data series that are aligned

and have the same number of data points otherwise it's not going to work. So the arrays the reference

arrays for both sort of parameters both variables need to be exactly the same length and if they're

not the same length it won't work and then obviously for your own benefit, you want to make sure that all of the prices or whatever data that you're looking at matches in each row as well for the dates that you're considering.

So with that data entered, you can see the correlation measures roughly 0.27 over the whole data set.

0.27 over the whole data set. Let's have a look now at rolling correlations

where we're going to use firstly a rolling one year window

to compute correlations over using the same data series

that we've just referenced previously as well.

So in column F, I'm going to head the column

one year roll coral.

And in cell F2, we're going to use the same correlation function

equals coral but this time when selecting the two return series I'm going

to make sure that the arrays only account for the last year of data so in this example

that means putting in equals coral open brackets

and we're gonna select from cells D2 to D54

for the first array and cells E2 to E54

for the second array.

The reason why we're going to row 54

is because that then accounts for 52 weeks of data

and that is equivalent to one year.

So over the latest year of data, you can see, and I say latest year of data because

we're looking firstly in the top row at the most recent data that we have available. So over the

latest year of data, you can see the correlation has measured much less than our sort of overall

correlation for the entire data set. So the reading is 0.04 and that shows already how

much correlation can change between two variables if we didn't already kind of anticipate that

that could happen. Let's take this a step further though and create a time series of

one year rolling correlations. All we need to do to do that is just copy that correlation

formula down to the end of the series. And

because the cell references we used in the arrays were dynamic, so not fixed, they effectively

calculate our rolling one-year correlation for the entire dataset. Now if we scroll down

to the bottom of the dataset there is something that we need to address and be careful of.

Firstly you can see that there's a few div 0 errors at the end of the series and

above these errors there are some correlation values but those values are

only being calculated with much less data than a year's data. So for example if

we double click into cell F300 you'll see that it's referencing a lot of blank

cells because there isn't a year of data available before the 24th of September 2015 in this data set.

So you have an option here, you can either leave values like this in and just understand that

they're not using a full year of data to calculate or we can just delete all the correlation

cells that don't use a full one year window that we're kind of looking for. Now I'm going to do the

latter here and by the way it goes without saying that you should also delete the div zero cells no

matter what. So all I'm going to do here is look at the row with the earliest returns values in which is row 309 in

this case and then minus 52 from that number because there's 52 weeks in a year. That gives us

row 257 and so we know that this is the last correlation calculation cell that we want in this

column and you can double click on that cell to make sure that it's the final

the final reference row in it is row 309. After establishing that all we do is select all of the

calculation cells below that one and clear the content by pressing delete on the keyboard.

So we're going to do one more calculation column now where we'll compute a two-year rolling

correlation window rather than the one-year. And I'm going to plot these then in a line

chart afterwards quickly to sort of show you the difference.

Okay so in cell G1 I'll head the column two-year roll coral and in cell G2 it's exactly the same formula as we've

been using previously except the array windows are going to be increased to incorporate 2

years of data which takes us this time to row 106.

So with the formula entered all we do is copy it down again and then delete all the correlation

values in this column that

don't encompass a full two years of returns data. In this case that means deleting the contents of

all cells from cell G206 and below. And note that when we do this that obviously the two-year

correlation series that we've just created is shorter by a year than the two-year correlation series that we've just created is shorter

by a year than the one-year rolling series that we created before. Okay, before

I comment on any of these numbers let's finish up by plotting a line chart of

the two correlation series that we've just created. You guys already know how to

do this by now so I'll just zip through this very quickly. I'm just going to

select a blank cell

in the sheet somewhere followed by navigating to insert on the ribbon and selecting a 2D line chart.

Next I'm going to right click within the chart area, go to select data series and select the data that we want to plot.

In this chart obviously we're dealing with different length data sets so I find the easiest way to handle that

is typically to reference data series and dates down to the row of the longest data series. In

this case that's going to be the one year correlation series. That series ends in row 257

and so when adding each series and their respective dates I'm just going to make sure that the reference always finishes at row 257.

So we have the data in the chart now and I'm just going to tidy it up quickly by

adding a legend and then moving the date axis to the bottom of the chart. First

of all to add the legend I'm just going to select the chart and go to chart

design on the ribbon followed by add chart element then choose legend and

choose top so put the legend at the top of the chart. Then to move the date labels I'm

going to double click on the date labels themselves and in the panel on the

right hand side that appears within the axis options tab I'm going to click on

labels at the bottom and then change the label position to low.

Alright, so what can we see here? Firstly, clearly correlations can change quite a bit

over time. This is an example where the correlations are particularly volatile, I think, but it

does go to show that when calculating or relying on correlation values from the past, you

do have to accept and understand that they're not perfect and they could easily change. Secondly you can see that there's

quite an obvious difference in the one and two year rolling correlations. Basically the two year

correlations are less sensitive and less volatile than the one year ones which makes sense because

more data is being used to calculate them. In a sense you can look at this in the same way that

you might look at moving averages or

anything like that. The smaller the calculation window the more sensitive the series and the

quicker that you'll pick up any changes in the data or in the correlation in this instance but

equally the more unstable it is and arguably the less reliable it is in the case of correlations because it doesn't take advantage of

as much data in the computation. A similar thing can be said for taking snapshots of correlation values

so you know the shorter or more and more recent window of data you use the more timely it is and

you might think that's a better indication of correlation in the future or you may think using

larger windows is better because there's more data involved in the future or you may think using larger windows is better because

there's more data involved in the calculation and quite often correlations revert to their mean.

There is no right answer here. In the portfolio volatility model that I've created in this sheet

I've used all-time co-variances and correlations and variances as estimates. But you may find when you do more targeted correlation

analysis using the choral function here that you prefer shorter windows. What I would say

is that I don't think it's sensible really to use anything less than a year of data. But really,

the data window you use for calculating any statistics is up to you. What I kind of wanted to point out here mostly is that you will see variation depending on the data window that you use.

And I wanted to quickly point out some of the benefits and drawbacks of using kind of longer and shorter time frames to calculate your statistics from.

So the point of going through this little section was firstly to show you how you can quickly and easily calculate correlations yourselves in Excel for any data sets that you've been using just by using the correlation because that's going to enhance your understanding of

whatever two variables it is that you're looking at in your correlation analysis. Clearly as well

this exercise also reinforced one of the pitfalls that I mentioned about correlation analysis earlier

in that correlations are subject to change.

change. And I should amend that phrase really because it's not exactly a pitfall, it's just

something that we have to understand and be aware of and accept because although they can change,

using a sample of historical data is still the only simple way to estimate what correlations

might be in the future and it's those correlation values in the form of sort of covariances that are

then fed into our portfolio volatility model

in this sheet. So with that being said let's head back over to the portfolio volatility practice

sheet now where I'm going to run through some scenarios again and this time incorporate some

correlation analysis along the way. Okay as I said earlier this sheet is basically the same as the one that you saw in the last video

apart from that it now also contains this correlation table which we're going to be using in the

scenarios that follow. So to make things easy the portfolio scenarios I'm going to go through here

are exactly the same as the ones that we looked at in the previous video except this time we're going

to be looking at the

correlation side of things specifically. You'll see here I already have our first scenario set up

which is the 10 stock portfolio that's long mega cap and large cap positions including our FAANG

stocks. As we saw previously the annual volatility for this portfolio is estimated at 19.23% with an

average annual asset standard deviation estimation of 28.28%. So let's now have a

look at the correlations in more detail for this portfolio. At the bottom of the

sheet I've got this correlation matrix which as far as user input goes works in a very similar fashion to the way the

variance covariance matrix above works. At the moment this matrix is empty but all we need to do

to conduct our analysis is basically fill out the orange cells in columns b and ab with tickers and

values that represent whether the position is a long or a short. Because

there aren't any tickers entered into this correlation matrix at the moment,

but we do have some in the variance/covariance table above, you can see

that there are some warning signs in column A that basically show us a sort of

caution if there is any mismatch between the tickers seen in the adjacent

cells compared to the tickers seen in the adjacent cells

compared to the tickers seen in the representative cells in the matrix above.

So all we need to do to get started with looking at correlations in the current

portfolio is enter the tickers we have in the portfolio above into column B of

the correlation matrix and in the same order. Now you can obviously type these

in manually or if you want to do things a

little bit quicker you can copy the orange cells in the portfolio table above and paste them as

values as we sort of did in the previous portfolio in the previous video into the relevant

relevant cells as follows. And you can see now that our matching signals have turned to a green tick which

basically shows all of the tickers are in the right order and match those seen in the variance-covariance

matrix above. Next we need to define whether these positions are long or shorts in column AB. In the table above this is

sort of defined implicitly really by the net

allocation that we've assigned. Positive values are longs, negative values are

shorts. In this table we're not worried about weightings, we only need to know

whether each position is a long or short and this is done by selecting either a

1 or a minus 1 from the drop-down menus in each cell in column AB. Long positions should

have a value of one, short positions should have a value of minus one and

we're considering a long only portfolio in this scenario so clearly all of the

values here should be set to one. So with that done you can now see the correlation matrix is populated with values. Each of these

values represent the pairwise correlation for the assets seen in the relevant row and column.

For example the correlation between Apple and Microsoft is estimated at 63.95% and the correlation between Facebook and Netflix is estimated to be 40.01%. These

correlations are calculated from the full time series of returns that's been computed in the

asset return sheet. So whatever time horizon that you've got set in that sheet defines the estimates

for all of our variances, covariances and correlations in this model.

The idea of this correlation matrix is that you can quickly and easily see which positions in the

portfolio you expect to be more or less correlated with each other. I've also tried to make an aggregate

analysis of each position a bit easier by calculating

average correlations at the end of each row in column AC. So for example here we

can see that Microsoft has an average pairwise correlation with all the other

positions in the portfolio of 53.34% whilst Netflix has an average

correlation value of 34.5%. Based on these correlation values we can see which assets

have relatively high correlations and which are more effective diversifiers. And all else being

equal you could argue that the assets with the lowest average correlations are the most important

portfolio components. Now of of course, practically speaking,

there is so much more to consider,

such as idea quality and its potential for returns,

as well as whether these correlation values

are actually reasonably estimated

and indicative of future relationships between assets.

But nonetheless, it gives us a very solid insight into which assets are likely to have higher or lower correlations going forward.

As well as those average correlations for each position,

I've also got a cell that calculates the average pairwise correlation across the whole portfolio, which is cell AC74.

Currently, that's reading 42.79% for this portfolio.

that's reading 42.79% for this portfolio. This is somewhat analogous to the correlation value we saw in the diversification principles chart and so clearly you know the lower the correlation the

better in terms of risk. Again there are more things to consider here such as the assumptions

that all assets are equally weighted for the purposes of this correlation matrix and also lower risk doesn't necessarily mean a better portfolio. Remember it's more about the risk

adjusted returns of the portfolio. So basically this correlation matrix is useful to us because

we know how important correlation is to the overall portfolio volatility and this matrix allows us to understand

and identify where the most significant relationships between positions in our portfolio might lie

and therefore gives us an idea about tweaking weightings and positions to affect the overall

portfolio volatility. I'm going to stress this again though. Correlation analysis is important, but it shouldn't supersede

fundamentals in the decision to enter trades or not. So always remember that.

Let's look over our second scenario now though, which is our long, large and mid cap portfolio.

I'm going to copy and paste the tickers for that portfolio from the front

summary sheet here and paste them into both the variance covariance matrix and the correlation

matrix inside our portfolio volatility practice sheet. Now for this scenario I don't need to change

any orange cells in column AB since the allocations that we're assuming for

the portfolio matrix are the same and the positions are all longs as well so the correlation matrix

doesn't need updating in that column either. So as we saw in the previous video the portfolio

volatility and average position volatility for this scenario is quite a bit higher than the last one, reading 29.36% and 44.33% respectively. However, when we

look at the correlation matrix, it's pretty clear that our average correlations are lower than the

previous scenario, 38.52% versus 42.79%. Now, these results are actually very typical of the difference between mega cap and mid cap portfolios.

Mid caps tend to have higher individual volatilities as we know, which means they typically have greater expected returns,

but also they tend to have lower average correlations to other stocks.

than mega caps do which makes them better more efficient portfolio diversifiers as well.

And when you think about this that makes a lot of sense because smaller companies tend to have less diversified operations and so their revenues earnings and therefore stock prices are dictated by factors that are less diluted and less common to other stocks.

diluted and less common to other stocks. You can also see that the average correlation values between each position are lower. So the maximum average correlation we see here is 45.75% assigned

to ticker LEN and the minimum is 29.96% assigned to VTRS. And by the way, these lower average

correlation values in this portfolio that includes mid caps

now aren't a fluke. If you need a bit more confirmation about that you can have a look

at the variance covariance correlation matrix sheet where I've set up a table that calculates

the correlations between all of the stocks listed in this spreadsheet and I've aggregated them to

create average correlations amongst mid caps compared to

large and mega caps and as you'd expect mid caps tend to have lower average correlations.

And in reality if you were to include all US listed stocks, not just the ones I have here,

the difference would be even greater and the results I have here therefore are kind of skewed in the favor of large and mega

caps anyway. I've put a couple of notes about that in the sheet here but basically it's because the

sample size for mid caps would actually be much much larger than how it's sort of represented here

in this sheet. So the takeaway from this scenario is again reinforcing the fact that mid

caps have multiple benefits when included in our portfolios. It's greater volatility in themselves

which gives us scope for increased expected returns but also higher diversification benefits as well.

Now our third and final scenario is our long short mid and large cap portfolio where we're long

six stocks the majority being mid caps and short four stocks. This portfolio as I said in the

previous video is much closer to the kind of portfolio we'd expect ITPM traders to build

because it utilizes long and short positions as well as mid cap stocks. To make things easy and

comparable you'll remember we

actually kept the exact same stocks for this portfolio as the last one but all we did was

sort of change the allocations to include short positions. If you remember the top four tickers

in this portfolio which are all large cap stocks are short positions and so in the volatility model we need to change

the allocations to those four positions to minus $10,000 instead of plus $10,000. Equally

for the correlation model those four positions need to be assigned minus one values in the

column AB to make them short rather than the

than values of 1. As in the last video when these inputs are entered we retrieve a portfolio

volatility value of 11.23% and maintain the exact same average asset volatility number of 44.33%.

That's because we're obviously using the same stocks we're just changing the weightings to

include some shorts. So let's

have a look at the correlation matrix now for this scenario and it's here where

we can see a massive difference in average correlations across the board.

Overall correlations have become much much closer to zero and some have turned

negative because of the inclusion of short positions and that gives us an overall average portfolio

correlation of minus 4.69% and this is the main reason why we've seen such a dramatic decrease

in the portfolio volatility estimate. Including both long and short positions has resulted in

this sort of incredibly efficient diversification through these really low correlation estimates

and all the while we're still taking advantage of high volatility individual positions by including

many mid caps. So now we've been through those scenarios let's go through a few examples using

this correlation model. So let's say that we're currently holding this portfolio which

by the way isn't something that you should be doing when you view this course. These trades are just

examples only and they're clearly not relevant to your own kind of circumstance or probably the

time that you're actually watching this series anyway. That goes for any kind of examples that

we look at throughout the series. They are

just examples. You've always got to do your own work. But anyway, for example, let's say we're

holding this portfolio and we have a watch list running in the background with a bunch of great

fundamentally driven ideas. At some point, the timing of one of our ideas let's say long tempo seeley so tpx looks good and we're

thinking about putting the position on before doing so though we might want to see how this trade

fits in our current portfolio structure and we can also model the effects of including it on

overall portfolio volatility expectations and it would be nice to see how

it correlates to other positions in the portfolio as well. Assuming we have capital to spare,

let's model what would happen if we include this position in the portfolio with an allocation of

$10,000. To do that, we would just enter the ticker TPX into both the volatility and correlation models and assign a capital allocation

of $10,000 to the volatility matrix and a 1 value to the correlation matrix in column AB.

If we then take a look at the results we can see

that the overall portfolio volatility estimate has increased by about 1.5% and as far as correlation

values go nothing really sticks out. TPX pairwise correlations are okay across the board, nothing's

particularly high, not enough to cause a red flag anyway and the average correlation for that

position to the other positions is also okay. It's not the highest, it's not the lowest and overall it has

increased the average correlation to minus 2.66%. All pretty insignificant and that's a good sign

really. When doing this we just want to understand how it sits, how the new position that we're

looking at sits in the portfolio and make sure that there's no obviously

high correlations or increases in portfolio volatility that then might cause red flags and

warrant further investigation. The majority of the time in your own portfolios this is going to be

the case. If both the fundamentals and technicals for a prospective position look good it's generally

going to be okay to put on but it is still worth modeling

and checking what's happening at the portfolio level to make sure that you're happy and there's

no sort of red flags being raised. Now if you guys are really doing your work properly you might be

in a situation where you actually have a high number of quality ideas ready to go at the same

time whilst also maintaining a reasonably

full portfolio. Now if that's the case you've got some decisions to make. Do you want to swap any

positions out? If not do you have any capital spare to add new ones? If you can only add one out of say

two or three trades how are you going to choose Again, I'm always going to say that these decisions

should be driven primarily by the fundamental strength of the idea and your own conviction.

However, in the scenario where you might be choosing between a couple of ideas and everything

about them seems equal in terms of quality and timing, then you could use portfolio volatility

and correlation modelling to sort of make what is likely the best

decision at the portfolio level. So for example let's say as well as TPX we're also considering

universal display core so OLED and ultimately you think that there's nothing between these two ideas in terms of quality or conviction.

One approach to consider is modelling how the portfolio structure is affected with including each one and then making a decision based on that.

So let's remove TPX now and include OLED instead to see how things change.

instead to see how things change. So you can see here that the estimated portfolio volatility has decreased as has the average correlation inside the portfolio and OLED itself looks to be less

correlated in each pairwise relationship.

relationship. Now I wouldn't say there's a massive amount in it but it is something. OLED looks

slightly more attractive at the portfolio level in this case. However that is only the risk side of

things. Perhaps we should also be expecting lower returns from OLED. Well if what I said before is

true and everything about this trade really is on equal terms then that should have already

been considered before we even got to this point. But if we wanted to go back and check the historical

and implied volatility of the stock at this point and think about whether that changes our expectations

we could do that as well. So those are the sorts of things that you should be thinking about in

terms of modeling portfolio volatility and correlations, thinking about what your portfolio structure looks like when you add positions or change positions.

And as I've been saying throughout this video and the last video, not every bit of analysis that we're looking at here is actionable in and of itself.

It should be noted and considered in the broad

context of everything else and once you've completed the whole course and

started down the road of practical implementation yourself you'll be in a

far more informed and confident mind frame in making some of these decisions.

So that's it there's nothing else to look at in this video. The rest of the spreadsheet

is all the same. Please remember all of the practical implementation steps from the last

video though because they do apply again here. And what I mean by that is how you update

and prepare all of your prices and returns data so that it feeds through correctly to

the portfolio volatility and correlation models. Okay so what are the important

points to take away from this video and the last one in terms of correlation and portfolio structuring?

In the last video we learned that a portfolio's variance is a function of both the variances and

co-variances of individual assets within the portfolio. However, we found that as more assets are added to the portfolio,

it's the covariance terms that become the dominant contributors

to the eventual output of portfolio volatility.

We learned that the relationship between assets then,

whether measured in terms of covariance or correlation,

is the most important factor in portfolio diversification.

With that in mind then,

it set us up with the key concept running throughout this video, which has been that correlation assessment is a hugely important factor to consider in the context of portfolio

construction. And I've talked through and demonstrated that in a number of ways.

We've discussed how efficient diversification leads to higher risk adjusted returns.

What I mean by efficient diversification is incorporating positions in the portfolio

with low correlations to reduce portfolio risk at a faster rate and a higher magnitude than if we

included medium options.

or high correlation positions. That allows us to sufficiently diversify without including so many

positions that we then sacrifice the quality and conviction of our ideas, which is obviously

detrimental to our expected returns. Remember also that the more positions you add, the lower the

marginal benefit of risk reduction becomes anyway. So building a long short portfolio that predominantly

incorporates mid cap stocks is a great vehicle to actually achieve this. A mix of long and short

trades is a massive aid to lower correlation positions and hence reduced risk and mid caps

not only offer up the opportunity for higher profits than larger cap stocks,

but also give us a wider range of correlations to work with.

And often they'll represent a more efficient diversifier

than their larger cap counterparts as well.

So with that being said,

there's a few things to consider at this point

from a practical perspective.

There are many considerations in using correlation values

as I covered throughout

the first section of this video and it would be naive to assume that historical correlation

always implies future correlation since there may be events in the future that cause correlations

to change even if only temporarily. So we've seen that in a number of examples throughout

the video. One of the most important ones being when we looked at what happens

when liquidity crises occur and correlations tend to one. There's a sort of dash for cash and all

assets tend to move in the same direction. So correlations tend to one. I've already touched

on the idea of over diversification as well, but that is another important practical consideration

because even in

the unrealistic scenario where we assume we can find an endless number of low correlation ideas

to add to the portfolio we still need to be cognizant of the opportunity or profit side of

the equation and what I mean by that is that over diversification tends to lead to executing lower

quality and lower conviction ideas

and that can seriously damage future returns.

So there still needs to be a certain amount of concentration of positions to maximize returns

whilst taking advantage of low correlations where possible.

And for the umpteenth time, correlation considerations always come after solid fundamental analysis.

Another thing I want to reiterate from the previous video is that by constructing a long short portfolio,

we've seen that estimated portfolio volatility decreases significantly.

Despite the reduction in volatility, it's important to remember that that doesn't necessarily mean less opportunity for profit.

Long short portfolio strategies can work in all markets which actually is much better for wealth

creation over time and we talked about that in the previous video but not only that as I

said before the diversification benefits are much more efficient due to the low or negatively

correlated positions which means our risk adjusted returns can be much greater. We can also increase

upside in our returns or the opportunity side of the equation by structuring our trades with

leveraged products such as options which is something we talk about in the professional options trading masterclass video series. Not only does that allow for magnified returns but if it's used correctly

it can also be a really great way of managing risk as well due to their asymmetric risk profiles.

All of those concepts and the theory that we've talked about hopefully came together when we went

through some examples and scenarios where I practically demonstrated how you could use the portfolio volatility and correlation

spreadsheet models that I've built for you for your own purposes. Using that spreadsheet is something

that you should be doing on a pretty regular basis to help yourselves understand your own portfolios,

where the risks lie and also make decisions based on your current and

prospective portfolio structures. Always remember though, with all of that in context, to successfully

implement correlation analysis, you need to understand how correlation works and its pitfalls

so that you don't rely too much on a single statistical number and become sort of complacent about correlation

analysis because you know correlation analysis like everything else is just a

tool to improve the probability of success and it's by no means the holy

grail. Anyway good work guys this volatility and correlation stuff isn't

that easy to get your head around but I'm sure you'll all get the hang of it as you watch and re-watch these videos and also play around

with all the spreadsheets and practically implement what you've learned as well. That's it for this

video though and I'll see you in the next one where we're going to talk about portfolio beta,

how you can measure it and why it's useful.