Welcome guys to another spreadsheet class and in this one what we're going to do is build on the previous video where Anton talked about setting stops and targets for positions using distribution of returns and average true range percentage analyses.

involve teaching you how to build a distribution of returns analysis and also an average true range percentage analysis in Excel so that you can then estimate suitable stops and targets for assets that

you're looking to trade. And we're going to start off by building a distribution of returns analysis

from scratch and then after that we're going to move over to using some templates to conduct the

rest of the analysis which is a much faster method since a lot of the work is actually automated. These templates

will of course be available to you in the downloads folder for this video. We

have one spreadsheet template for a distribution of returns or DOR analysis

and one for an average true range percentage or ATRP analysis. Now I'll show

you how to use those templates

properly later in the video and I'm going to do that by using real examples

to calculate potential stops and targets for individual assets in a similar way

to how Anton did it in the previous video. We're also going to cover a short

example of how you can create stops and targets for spreads as well. Now as you

guys know creating stops and targets for spreads as well. Now as you guys know creating stops and

targets is an important aspect of preventative risk management and that helps us achieve better

performance as traders. But it isn't the only preventative risk management technique available

and I'm going to talk about some others towards the end of the video which are namely setting

portfolio limits on things like gross exposure, cash net exposure and beta adjusted net exposures.

The reason why we employ all of these PRM measures is so that we achieve better trading performance, as I said,

and there are a number of ways we can measure our performance, which incidentally you will hear me talk about again in a few videos time.

But the ones I want to mention now are R score

targets and win loss rate targets. Now you've heard about R scores before from previous presentations

and this is basically just a ratio of dollar profits to dollar losses from your realized P&L

and that is your closed trades in your portfolio. A good target to hit for R scores is about 1.5 or higher and a great

R score is typically around 2 or above. Your win-loss rate is fairly self-explanatory. That is just the

percentage of winning versus losing trades that you make, again based on your realized P&L or closed

trades in your account. And a good win/loss ratio is achieving

something like 60% profitable trades and 40% loss making trades.

Equally 55/45 is a ratio is okay and 65/35 is really really good over the long term.

So in order to try and hit those targets, we use PRM techniques like stops and targets

on individual trades, but also we set various portfolio limits as well.

For example, portfolio gross exposure limits should be set based on a multiple of the net

cash deposit or margin in our brokerage accounts.

Now depending on where you are in the world and what assets you're trading, those limits

might change and I'm going to talk about that more later but if you're based in the us trading us stocks that limit is legally enforced

by brokers and capped at two times leverage however if you're in other parts of the world

and have access to cfd instruments then you'll be able to attain much higher leverage and so in that

case you need to impose limits on yourself which probably

should be around four times leverage. Anything above that kind of starts to involve much too

much risk. Limits should also be set for portfolio beta adjusted net exposure and also cash net

exposure as I talked about back in video 20 and these limits might range between plus and minus

30% for beta and plus and minus 50% for cash net exposure and again I'm going to talk about these

limits towards the end of the video. Now as I said we're going to start this video by conducting the

distribution of returns and average true range percentage analyses for the purposes of generating

stops and targets.

And I do realise that we've already covered distributions quite a bit in this series,

so some of this material is going to feel very familiar. And on top of that,

for those of you that have done the IPLT course, the ATRP analysis is also going to feel quite familiar as well. But where we are covering kind of completely new ground here is

applying these two volatility analyses for the purposes of creating stops and targets for our

positions. So there will be something new for everyone in this video, but also for many of you

there will be parts that serve as some solid revision of various concepts. Okay, so with that

being said, let's get started. Now for the purposes of our

volatility analyses in this video, we're going to assume that we've done all of our fundamental work

to come up with a couple of solid stock ideas. And we're also going to assume that the timing is in

place for those ideas. So all that we want to do now is figure out what reasonable stops and

targets should be for our positions, given their historical volatility.

And the trades that we're going to look at as examples here in this video

are long ZNGA, so that's Zinger, and short ALGN, that's Align Technologies.

And to begin with, I'm just going to use a distribution of returns analysis

to come up with some stops and targets for these stocks,

and then I'll move on to an average true

range percentage analysis later. So let's look at Zinger stock first and the first step here is

going to be obtaining the price data that we need to in order to create our analysis.

And I'm going to find price data for this stock on

Yahoo Finance. Now the URL for Yahoo Finance is just finance.yahoo.com. So that's the website I'm

going to navigate to and then from there to find price data on Zynga, the ticker is ZNGA.

Remember, I'm just going to type that ticker into the search bar at the top here and then click

Zynga from the drop down menu. That takes me to the stock page

for that stock and then from there we're going to go to the historical data tab

and in this page what we want to do is choose the variables of the historical data that we want to

look at and then download. So in this case I want to basically look up the entire price history

that we have available on Yahoo Finance for this stock. To do that I'm just going to select

this time period variable here and then select max. And I'm also going to choose to display

and download those prices on a monthly frequency. So rather than daily here I'm just going to

click that drop down and then select monthly. From there I'm just going to click that drop down and then select monthly

from there i'm then going to click apply which will apply those variables that we've just chosen

to this data set and then i'm going to click on download now for me when i click download there

on yahoo finance it basically downloads as a csv file which can be opened in Excel as it will for you as well but depending on what your

operating system is and what web browser you're using you will need to

take different steps in order to open the file but for me as you can see here

there's a shortcut provided by Google Chrome I'm using Windows with Google

Chrome by the way so I can just click on that file shortcut there to open that price data in Excel.

So with the price data open in Excel for this stock, there's a couple of things that I want to address and make changes to.

Firstly, you can see that the dates in column A are currently showing as hash symbols.

And that's just because the column width isn't large enough to display the dates properly.

So I'm just going to expand the column width there so we can see the data more easily.

Secondly, now we can see those dates in column A, you'll notice that their format is the day

followed by the month followed by the year.

And that might look odd to you if you're based in the US or elsewhere, but here in the

UK that is how we format our dates.

That being said, to make things a little bit clearer

I'm just going to change the format of those dates

and then selecting format cells and choosing the custom category in the number tab and then creating

a format a custom format by typing over the type box here with dd-mm-yyy. And once I press ok there you'll see that that makes the dates

a little bit easier to read and less ambiguous, irrelevant of what kind of geography you're in.

Now there's a few more steps here that I want to take before starting to run some calculations.

And at this stage, I just want to highlight to you guys that I will be going quite fast through some of this Excel work because you guys should have seen most, if not all, of the techniques I'm going to use in this video in previous videos in the video series.

However, if you are unsure at any point, don't panic. Just pause the video and use Google to find the answers. It should be pretty easy given you've got the video

in front of you as well to work from. Okay so for a distribution of returns

analysis we don't actually need the volume data in column G so I'm just

going to delete that straight away and next as I've said in other videos it's

common practice in the finance industry to run time series in descending order

and what that means is

basically sorting the price data we have here so that the most recent data is at the top of the

sheet. To do that we just add a filter to the data by selecting a column title and then going to data

on the ribbon followed by filter and then we can select the filter menu in column a that's our date

column and just choose to sort that data from newest to oldest.

Finally, I think, before going any further, let's just rename this sheet that we're working as well,

just to something more appropriate. So I'm going to right click the sheet name down here

and just rename it to ZNGA Monthly DOR, for example. So now we've prepared the data, we can move on to the second step, which is checking the

data for any errors and running our initial returns calculations.

Now sometimes when you download data from Yahoo Finance or other sources, you'll find

that the most recent data point shows an incomplete period.

So for example, here we might have seen that the difference between the most recent two

rows of

price data didn't actually account for a full month. If something like that happens what you'll

need to do is remove the latest data entry because it's essential that our prices are split evenly

through time and as you can see here that's what we have. The prices are displayed on the first of

every month running back through history so fortunately everything looks good at this point and we

can move on to running some calculations. Now when doing a distribution of returns

analysis for the purpose of generating stops and targets it's useful to run a

dual distribution analysis whereby we look at both close to close monthly

returns and also high toto-low percentage differences.

So with that being said, in column G, what we're going to do now is calculate close-to-close monthly returns

and in column H, we'll compute high-to-low monthly returns.

So in column G, I'm going to head the column C-C returns.

And in the cells below, I'm just going to calculate the returns for each month on a closed to closed price basis.

So starting in cell 2, the formula for the equal F2, so the current closed price divided by F3, the previous closed price minus 1.

And that is just a simple percentage change formula from one period to two.

the next that you guys should all be familiar with. Now after typing that in

the formula can be copied down to the end of the data set by using the auto fill

shortcut. So that is just double clicking the little green box in the

bottom right of the formula cell that we just created and just remember that

whenever you do auto fill a formula down or across you need to check the data

at the end of the series. So here for example, if we scroll down to the

bottom of the data set you'll see that there is a div zero error in the final cell and that just

occurs because the formula that we're using is trying to reference price data that doesn't exist. So

it's trying to reference price data in the cell below our final price data. So knowing that we

can just remove that formula or delete the cell and move on to the next column.

As I said the next column is our high to low returns and so I'm just going to

title that column h-l returns. The formula for this column is just going to

calculate the percentage change from the low price during a given period, or month in this case, to the high price.

So the formula that I'm going to type into cell H2 here is equals C2 divided by D2 minus 1.

Okay, obviously after we've put that in we can also copy that formula down to the end of the series and check it.

And as you can see we don't have any errors here so that's fine.

So that's our returns calculations done.

And before we move on let's just quickly change some formatting there.

Firstly I'm going to make the column titles bold.

And then also let's change the format of these returns columns so

that they're displayed as percentages to three decimal places which is done simply

by selecting the columns and right-clicking in the selection followed by

choosing the percentage category and overwriting the specified decimal places

to a value of three. So now that we have our returns calculations done and

everything formatted to this point,

the next step is to calculate our histogram tables and charts, which essentially tell you

how many data points lie within specific intervals for both the close-to-close data and the high-to-low data as well.

Now in this video, I'm only going to walk you through building the close-to-close analysis

since the steps required for the high-to- is basically all the same and you guys will be able to practice that yourselves.

Also remember that later in the video I'm going to show you how to use a template file to speed

all of this stuff up and in there we will be looking at both close-to-close and high-to-low

analysis. Okay so at this stage you've already seen these distribution analyses a

number of times in this series, so I won't go into too much detail here, but as a very

quick reminder, they're useful to us because they allow us to visually assess the empirical

probability of various ranges of values occurring. So in this case, we're looking at stock return

and so we can learn about how an asset has behaved in the past, its volatility and hence both the risk and opportunity in trading that asset over the time frame that we're analysing.

That's what we talked about in the IPLT course.

Here though, what we're going to do is use that same analysis with the end goal of generating suitable stops and targets for a stock position.

So the first thing that we need to do when creating some histogram data is to

define the intervals that we want to count the data within. Now there's no hard and fast rules for creating

exact histogram intervals, but two things to make sure of are firstly that the intervals encompass the vast majority of data, meaning

the vast majority of our close to close returns majority of our closed-closed returns, and secondly,

that the intervals are evenly spaced. Now in this example, I'm going to choose to start my intervals at

minus 25% or minus 0.25 in decimal format and increase that value incrementally by 5% until we get to a value of

plus 25% or plus 0.25. So to do that in cell J3 I'm just going to title this column

intervals and then in the cells below from J4 to J14 I'm going to write in the intervals I just

outlined. So starting with a value of minus 0.25 in cell J3 and increasing that interval by 0.05, that's 5%, until we reach a finishing value of plus 0.25

in cell j14. So with those intervals defined, we can then use Excel's data analysis tool

to count the number of data points, that is monthly returns, that lie within those intervals

that we've just created. And to access Excel's data analysis tool pack, you can go to data on the ribbon

and then select the data analysis button on the right hand side.

Now if you don't see that button, then it probably means that you don't have the add-in installed.

And if that's the case, don't worry, you can install it really easily

just by going to file, then options, then add-ins, choose Excel add-ins and then make sure that both

the analysis tool pack and analysis tool pack VBA checkboxes are ticked

before pressing ok on the dialog box and when you do that you'll then see

the data analysis button appear on the right hand side. So when clicking on the data analysis button we are presented with a number of

analysis tools to choose from and at this stage we want to choose the one that

says histogram and once we select that and press OK you'll see another dialog

box appear which requires various user inputs. The first one is the input range

that's fairly easy it's just the range of close to close returns that we see in column G.

So we can just put the cursor in that box and then select all of that data.

The next one is the bin range.

Now the bin range is just another name for our intervals.

So in that box you can just select cells J4 to J14, which are the intervals that we just created.

And finally we need to choose an output range.

And to do that I'm just going to select the output range option and choose cell K3 and then press OK.

Now as you can see here, that then writes two more columns of data into our Excel sheet.

The first is a repeat of our intervals in column K and

that column is called bin and the next one is called frequency in column L and those values

are actually counts of the number of close to close returns that have values that lie

between the interval ranges that we have created. Now it's not actually clear at this

stage what ranges the analysis tool is actually using so let me explain that to you now. The first value in cell L4 just counts the number of

monthly returns that have a value of less than -0.25. The cell below counts the

number of monthly returns that have a value that lies between -0.25 and -0.2

so -25% to -20%. The cell below that counts the number of monthly returns that have a

value that lies between -0.2 and -0.15 and so on all the way until we get to the final cell cell

L15 which counts the number of monthly returns that have a value of greater than 0.25 which is

our maximum interval. Now I know those ranges aren't very obvious based on just the numbers that we see here.

So in the next column, what I suggest we do

is write in some text that are clearer.

And then in cell M4, I'm just going to type in the range that the count in cell L4.

So that's going to be less than minus 25%.

In the cell below that, the next range is between minus 25% and minus 20% and so on.

So bear with me a moment here while I type in all of those text ranges we need just to make this data a little bit clearer.

text ranges we need just to make this data a little bit clearer.

Okay, at this stage I think it's a good time to step away from this histogram table just so that we can create some summary statistics for this data. For

example it'd be useful to have some values for centrality and also volatility

amongst some other metrics as well. And a good

tool that Excel has to generate these statistics quickly is the Descriptive Statistics tool

with the Data Analysis Tool Pack. So just as with the Histogram Analysis tool, we find that by

clicking on the Data Analysis button within the Data tab on the ribbon, but this time we're going

to navigate to Descriptive statistics rather than histogram. Once

that's selected all we need to do here is enter the input range we're using again

so that's our monthly close to close returns in column G and then check the

box called summary statistics and this time I'm going to choose an output

for this data which is going to be cell J17. From there we can see a whole bunch of summary

statistics have been populated in the sheet. Now I'm not going to go through these in any detail

because we've been through all of this stuff before in the money supply video and you should also be

familiar with it all from the basic statistics pdf in video 3 as well. Instead all I'm going to do

here is just tidy things up a

little bit by increasing the column widths so that we can see the data more

easily and renaming the title in cell J17 to something like descriptive

statistics and then also reformatting some of these numbers to percentages or

just numbers with less decimal places depending on what's appropriate

statistic.

Now despite going through this step for creating some summary statistics we

don't actually need them particularly for figuring out our stops and targets

however I did want to make sure that we covered that step just so that you know

how to generate those statistics quickly in case you forgot from our

previous videos.

And when you're doing something like a volatility analysis, it will help you kind of assess the risk and opportunity in an asset. Okay, so with that little descriptive statistics detour out of the

way, let's get back to the histogram table that we were creating. So in column L, we have our

frequency data that counts the absolute number of data points that fall within certain ranges.

However, what would be more useful to us than the absolute values is if we had that same data displayed as a percentage of the total count.

So, for example, we know that two observations of monthly returns have values below minus 25 percent,

but it would be nice to know what is that value as a percentage of the entire

data set in the adjacent.

So to begin with here, the percentage, and then that in in cell 4, I'm going to create a fancy count as divided by k31.

And that is just the count for the adjacent range divided by the total count in cell k31.

And that cell reference is fixed so that we can copy the formula down to all the rest of the columns, oh sorry, all the rest of the cells in the column.

formula down to all the rest of the cells in the column. So with that formula copied down, we have the values that we need.

Let me quickly reformat these cells to display themselves as a percentage to two decimal places now.

And then just as a reminder, with this data, it lets us say things like, historically speaking in this example, on 2.52% of occasions the stock has returned between -20% and -15% on a monthly basis.

And from that sort of analysis we can then choose to extrapolate those realities to the future. Now, unfortunately,

future probabilities are likely to be different, but using historical data, as I've said in previous

videos, is one of the best guides that we have. So moving on to the next column now, which is the

cumulative frequency column. This data is just going to sum up the probabilities for each range

seen in column N on an additive basis, starting from the lowest range that we have. Now I'm going

to start by titling this column CUMU frequency

percentage and then the first calculation in cell O4 is just going to be equal to cell N4.

So that's just the the lowest frequency percentage range that we have. But in the cell below that we

want to make sure that we add the probability for the new range to the cumulative probability that we have so far. So the formula there will be equals n5 plus 04 and then we can

copy that formula down. Now what this data allows us to say is things like for example here we've got

49.58% of the return that has a value of 0% or below and 89% of the returns data has a value of 15%

or below. That's plus 15% or below. We can also turn these values on their head. So for example,

we can say that if 89% of returns have a value of 15% or below, That also then means that 11% of the data has values of above 15%. So these two

frequency percentage columns here, or probability columns if you like, are very useful for helping

us generate stops and targets. And those are the columns that you guys will have already basically

seen and you'll recognize from Anton's presentation previously. And we're going to go into a bit more detail on these

later in the video. So with the histogram table completed, the next stage we're going to tackle is all about presentation.

And at the moment, the data that we've got here looks a bit dry and isn't really readable. So we're going to change all of that by improving the formatting of the cells that we have and also create a histogram chart so that we can visually analyze our data a

bit more easily. Now I'm not going to talk through all of the changes that I'm making

here because I'm sure that you guys know how to format your data and charts by now but

basically as you can see I'm just adding a few borders and then making our column titles

bold. Once that's done we should move on to making a chart.

And we want that chart to basically display our frequency percentage column of data in

the histogram table so that we can kind of visually interpret that data a little bit more

easily.

Now to do that, I'm just going to go to select a blank cell beside the descriptive statistics

table and then go to insert on the ribbon, followed by 2D Column

Chart. Then to add data to that chart, I'm just going to right-click inside the chart area and

go to Select Data. And from there, I'm just going to choose to add a series.

And the series name will just be the frequency percent type

and the series values will be the range covering all of the related data so from cells n4 to n15.

Next what I'm going to do is add some suitable labels, tells us what the ranges these frequency

percentage values actually refer to and this is where the text range column that we created earlier

comes into play. So to do that I'm going to select edit horizontal axis labels

and then choose the axis label range which is just m4 to cell m15. Alright so

that's it really for our chart. It doesn't actually tell us anything new but

what it does do is give us a visual aid to understand what the distribution of

returns looks like based on the frequency percentage data that we

calculated earlier.

Now I'm not going to go into too much detail here with formatting this chart but by all means when you guys do this yourselves you can go ahead and tidy it up a little bit. Whether you want to add

some axis labels or whatever you want to do that's up to you but for now we're just going to move on

to the next step. So as far as building the analysis that's most

important for creating good stops and targets we're actually pretty much done

here at least with the close to close data and as I said we're going to be

looking at the high to low data when we

move over to the template file. That being said, a few more tables go into further detail regarding

volatility analysis, but they aren't actually necessary purely for the purposes of creating

stops and targets. So I'm going to skip building those from scratch at this point and just talk

about them briefly when we move over to the template file. Now, as I said, having done the

histogram table and chart, we've completed the majority of work required for creating stops and targets.

But I do want to show you how you can go the extra mile here and improve your analysis slightly by looking at a full percentile analysis as well.

Now, ultimately, this next part will show a very similar thing to the histogram data, but it will go into a little bit more detail,

similar thing to the histogram data but it will go into a little bit more detail since instead of considering broad ranges of data to count within we can actually consider what values of returns

correspond to every single percentile in the distribution if we wanted to. Now you guys might

remember this stuff from the money supply video earlier in the series but I'm also going to show

you again here just as a reminder. So as a reminder, percentiles are a statistical measure indicating

the value below which a given percentage of observations lie. So for example, the 50th percentile

will be below 50% of all returns lie, which incidentally is also known as the median value.

Equally, the 75th percentile is the returns value below which 75% of the data lies, and so on.

This way of looking at the data is basically the same as the cumulative frequency data that we calculated previously,

except that because we aren't working from ranges of returns defined by intervals in a histogram, we can get a little bit of

more granular and just compute any percentile that we wish. And that is why I said previously

that this percentile analysis can add a little bit more detail. So let's create this percentile

analysis table now at the bottom here then and I'm going to start by defining all the percentage

ranks that we want to work out percentile scores for, meaning related returns values. So in cell J33 to J47, I'm going to type in percentiles from 1% to 15%, and those values are going to incrementally increase by 1% in each cell.

And then in cells L33 and L45, I'm going to incrementally increase the percentiles by 5%, starting from 20% in L33 and finishing at 80% in L45. And then in cells

N33 to N47 I'm going to incrementally increase the percentiles by 1% again starting from 85%

and finishing at 99%. Next in the adjacent cells to all of these ranks, we're going to work out the percentiles

themselves. So starting in cell K33, the formula will just be equals percentile.inc. That's our

function, Excel function that we're going to use, open brackets, column G, and that's a fixed

reference, comma, cell J33, and close brackets.

Now, this formula works out the value of returns where less than or equal to 1% of the data lies.

So notice with the formula that we're referencing column G, since that's where all of our returns data is,

and cell J33 as well, because that is the percent rank that we're working out the percentile value for.

Now, it's important to fix the reference for column G, as I said,

so that we can copy across this formula easily in a few moments' time.

So from here, we can just copy the formula down to the next cell,

and this is checking out the value of returns where less than or equal to 2% of the data lies.

And if we kind of continue with that logic, we can copy the formula all the way down to cell K47 now.

And then to work out the sort of values

for other percentage ranks,

we can just copy across the formula

that we created in cell K33 into cells M43 and O43

and auto fill them down for all the percentage ranks that we have.

Finally, to finish off this table I'm just going to add some outside borders to the three sections

here. So the three sections are from cell ranges J33 to K47, from L33 to M47, and from N33 to O47. And then I'm also going to reformat all the percentiles

that we've calculated so they're displayed as percentages to two decimal places as well.

Okay guys, so now we've done all of that work to build out a distribution

of returns. Hopefully that was just kind of a reminder for you guys really. Let's move over to

a template file that contains all the same analysis we just built but also includes a high to low

returns distribution as well which as you can see here is on the right hand side. Now as I said

previously you'll also notice a couple of extra tables that weren't covered in the previous section

and those are these ones here. So the analysis of positive and negative returns and

also the standard deviation band analysis. Now like I indicated at the time these tables aren't really

that important for generating stops and targets which is why I didn't cover them but they do provide

some extra detail to help you understand the volatility and hence risk and opportunity of trading

the asset that you're looking at. Now I'm not going to go into any more analytical detail on that because it was covered extensively in the IPLT

course and I also talked about it a bit in the money supply video earlier in the series as well.

So you guys can go back and check that if you need to. That being said I did want to make sure

we included it in the template file just so that you have it and you can use it if you wish.

So let's have a look at this template properly now.

And as you can see, I've already entered all of the price data we used previously for our ZNGA idea.

And now we can start using that data to help us come up with a sensible stop and target.

Now, a quick note here, guys.

stop and target. Now a quick note here guys, I'm going to go through how to update this template file and import new prices shortly using our align

technology short example but what I want to do first is get into the analysis of

choosing a suitable stop and target for our long ZNGA idea first. Also regarding

the data that you can see here it is all the same as in the sheet that I just

manually built.

It just looks slightly different because different intervals were used for the histogram.

But I assure you that the underlying data is all the same.

So the methodical way to go about this is firstly to figure out a stop value that means we're unlikely to get stopped out too easily based on the empirical data that we have here.

stocked out too easily based on the empirical data that we have here. So for example if we look at the histogram data at the top of the sheet we can see that

in the cumulative frequency data column that around 25% of the time ZNGA stock

has returned minus 6.86% or less. So that means conversely that 75% has returned

more than minus6.86%

If we made our stop loss at 7% and I say 7% because it's 6.86 rounded to the nearest whole number

then we would have about a 75% chance of not being stopped out based on the empirical data that we have here.

And that is perhaps a little tight for a stop loss loss but let's go with it now as a starting point

realistically we probably want somewhere between a 70 to 85 percent chance of not being stopped out

based on the historical data now seven percent is in that range for this stock but it is at the tight

end of that range

So, given a stop loss of 7%, what does that make our target? Well, as Anton has talked

about in the previous presentation, our target should be at least 3 times our stop on the

positive side, which means that we're basically trying to construct the trade with a 1:3 risk

reward ratio and a target R-score of 3. So, that means a 7% stop loss would equate to a

21% target.

Next, before we accept those values, we need to try and understand what the likelihood is of achieving our target.

So basically, what is our realistic opportunity here?

Well, if we have a look back to the histogram table, we can see that only in about 4.2% of cases has the stock had a monthly return of greater than 22%. And that might not sound great, but there are a few things to consider here. Firstly, we're only looking at monthly data here.

So to achieve our target of 21% over three months would be considerably more likely than over one

month. For example, achieving around a sort of 7% or more return each month has around a 23% probability

per month. Secondly, at the moment, we have only considered close-to-close data. Within each month,

the high-to-low range will, of course, be larger than our close-to-close data. And if we look at

the high-to-low data we have here here we can see that in around 97.5%

of occurrences the high to low range is greater than 7.56%. Now that obviously includes months

where the stock traded down but it still shows a really decent high to low volatility. Thirdly

we should expect that given our fundamental analysis, we're moving these percentage probabilities slightly in our favour, meaning it's actually slightly more likely that the stock achieves returns in the direction we want, subject to the quality of our fundamental analysis, of course.

but it is something to bear in mind. So with the high to low returns distribution showing us that the high-low volatility range is almost certain to be over 7% on

a monthly basis, what can we actually take from that? Well it means that we'll

probably know if we're wrong quite quickly if the stock has a down month and

will probably be stopped out very quickly. Equally though it also means

that there's ample opportunity for things to go right as

well. If we've done our fundamental and technical work well, there is enough volatility in the stock

to achieve our target. Now, I said a few moments ago that 7% might be a bit tight as a stop loss,

given there's a 25% chance of being stopped out on a monthly basis of closed prices,

and that's without any consideration of intra-month

moves. We've also seen with the high to low data that 7% price differences from low to

high occur very frequently. Given that, we might also consider refining our stops and

targets slightly and we can do that using the percent

percentile tables quite easily. And one way to look at this is simply by saying that you want to have a stop that represents only a certain percent chance of being triggered on a close to close basis. So rather than a 25% chance, for example, what about a 20% chance or a 15% chance?

If we look at our percentiles for the close to close data, we can look across from the various percentage ranks and see what percentile value that corresponds to.

So for example, if you want a stop that historically would have been triggered about 15% of times

on a close to close basis, then you can look across from the 15th percentage rank and see

a stop return of minus 10.14%. Equally, for a stop that is a figure of 10%, we can see that the

stop return would be minus 8.22%. Now, of course, increasing the size of the stops means increasing

the size of the target on the other side, given our 1 to 3 ratio. So when you do this, there's

basically two things to consider. Firstly, you need to make sure that there's enough room for

the stop to move without being stopped out too easily. And secondly, you need to make sure that there's enough room for the stock to move

without being stopped out too easily. And secondly, you need to make sure there's enough volatility in

the stock to reach your target, given the historical data. Now, balancing those two items

should get you somewhere near an answer. And then beyond that, it kind of becomes a discretionary

decision and your sort of risk appetite may play a part as well.

Now at this stage you might also want to consider some technicals when setting stops and targets as

well but you do need to be a little bit careful with that. You can only kind of use that after

you've determined a suitable range as defined by historical volatility. You've got to remember that

volatility is the driving factor and the most important consideration for setting stops and targets.

Ok, so let's say we've chosen to go with an 8% stop and a 24% TUBG analysis.

The current price for the stock on the 22nd of December 2021 is 6.38 and if we enter those details into the orange cells at the

bottom of this template file then you will see that it then calculates what the price stop and

target values are based on those inputs that we entered. So in this example here the stop loss

should be set at 5.87 and the target should be $7.91.

Okay, so that's some analysis done now for our long Zinger position.

Let's have a look now at our Align Technologies short.

And by the way guys, I've said this before but I'll say it again.

Any stocks that I'm talking about here are just examples.

Don't be stupid and try to kind of use these ideas in your portfolio because there's no fundamental work that's gone into them and by the

time you watch this video everything's going to have changed anyway.

Alright, so to generate stops and targets for Align Technologies

I'm just going to use this template file again and by doing so you guys are going to see

how easy it is to do this analysis quickly and successfully for any stock that you wish.

So whenever you're using this template with new or updated data, the first step is to remove the old

stale data that we already have here. And since we want to move on to calculating stops and targets

for Align technologies, we no longer need the Zinger data in this file. So to clear out all of

that you just need to select all of the data in columns A to F and then press delete on the keyboard and that will clear the contents

of those cells. After that you will see that almost all the formulas in this sheet return

error values. You don't need to worry about that, it's just because there's no new data

to work with in the file yet. So next what we want to do is delete our stop and target inputs in the orange cells in cells K59, 60 and 62.

And after that, the spreadsheet is ready to have new data imported into it.

So, this is the point at which we head over to Yahoo Finance again and obtain monthly price data, this time for Align Technologies. So let's go to the Yahoo Finance website and

navigating to the Align Technologies stock page by typing in the ticker ALGN

into the search bar at the top and then selecting the historical data tab once

we're on the Align Technologies stock page. From here we want to choose the

maximum time period possible again and also we want to make sure that the frequency of data is set to monthly.

After that you can just click apply and download.

And then with the data downloaded you just need to navigate to the downloaded file and open it.

And once it's open you can see here we need to take a few of the same steps that we did before which is expand the column width so that you can actually see the data and also sort that data from

newest to oldest so in descending order you can do that by clicking any one of

the column titles and then going to data on the ribbon and choosing filter and

after that we use the date filter to sort the data now here you can see what I

was talking about before when I said sometimes when you

download price data it can show prices for incomplete periods. So what we need to do here

is delete the most recent row since it doesn't represent a full month of data. And once that's

done we can copy columns A to F and paste them as values into columns A to F in the

template file. To paste the data as values just right click on column a and choose the one

two three clipboard option from the paste options and the reason why I'm telling you to paste the

data as values is just so that we can keep all the formatting as it was in the template file in those

columns which just makes it look a bit neater. Now at this stage then you might see that all the

calculation cells update properly and there's no longer any errors.

However, we aren't quite done yet.

Before moving on to some analysis, we need to make sure that our returns columns are updated properly.

Remember, we've imported a completely different set of data that will be a different length to the prior one in the file,

formulas need to be adjusted so that they're the same length as the new series.

To do that, just navigate to the bottom of those columns of data and see whether

the formulas need to be either deleted or auto-filled down to match the raw

price data length. In this case, we can see that the raw data is a longer data

set than our formulas are currently, so we need to auto-fill these formulas down

to the end of the data. And once that's done, remember to delete the final formula in column G, since it's always going to return an error for the reasons I mentioned earlier.

And now that that's done, we're ready to move on to some analysis.

So if we take a look at the data for aligned technologies quickly, it looks like it's more volatile at first sight than Zinger stock was since the range of monthly returns is a lot wider. That being said though, we do have to bear in mind

that the data set is a lot longer and therefore it's been traded through more economically volatile

periods such as the 2008 crisis for example. Now that's just something we want to take a mental

note of. We don't want to adjust our data set. We want to use the full data set since it improves

the statistical significance of our analysis.

So let's have a look at what we have here.

If we start with the close-to-close histogram, we can see that there's about an 83.6% chance of the stock returning up to 14.33% in a monthly period.

Remember that we're assuming a short fundamental thesis for this stock, and so that means we can view those figures the other way around, meaning there's a 16.4% probability, that's 100% minus 83.6%, and there's a 16.4% probability of being stopped out using a 14.33% stop based on the empirical data that we have.

the empirical data that we have. Now on the face of it that seems like quite a wide stop and if you think about the sort of probabilistic range that we like

to see for stops we typically want a 70 to 85% chance of not being stopped out

based on the historical close to close data. So in this case a 14.33%

stop is right at the top end of that. For now though let's just assume that

we're going to go with that 14% stop for this stock and see what everything looks like

in terms of a target. Now remember our target is always based around a three

times multiple of our stop and so if we say our stop is 14% then our target

should be 42%. Based on our close to close data, there's only a 0.8% chance that Align Technologies has a return

of less than minus 40.53% in a month, so this already feels like it's much too unlikely. But

even if we ignore those probabilities for a moment and just use some common sense,

does it really sound like it's a good idea to set an initial soft target that can only

really be hit if the stock halves?

It just doesn't really sound reasonable.

So let's skip over to the percentile analysis now, just to see if we can find something that

works a bit better with the extra detail that we have here.

that sticks out straight away here is the huge jumps in percentile values from the 85th percentage

rank to the 80th and then to the 75th. And remember we're looking at a short here so for a stop that's

only going to be triggered 25% of the time historically based on monthly close to close data

we need to look at the 75th percentage rank not the 25th. So let's consider creating a stop around the 75th percentile then, where the

return value is about 10%. That would mean that our target is about 30% and if we look

at the percentile table to find where minus 30% lies, it's somewhere between 2 and 3%

in terms of percentage rank. That means that historically there's only been somewhere between

2 and 3% of months where the close to close price has hit our potential target within a of percentage rank. That means that historically there's only been somewhere between 2% and

3% of months where the close to close price has hit our potential target within a month.

If we assume we split the target over three months, we would have to see just under -10%

returns each month. And again, if we look at the percentile table, there's only about

a 15% to 20% chance of that happening on a given month

and it would need to happen three times in a row for us to kind of hit our target. That's obviously

not impossible but it is pretty difficult. Looking over to the high to low range distribution there's

a 10 percent price change or more between the high and the low on around 90 percent of months

which sounds like it's a little bit more promising but that

does include up months as well as down months and so you can kind of see here how short ideas become

quite difficult to figure out suitable stops and targets for but you do have to remember when

you're going through this sort of analysis that you have to have shorts in the portfolio for balance and in order to make your portfolio suitable for all market conditions. So again as I said previously what this is going to come down

to is starting with some hard numbers and just trying to play around with figures to see what

can work in terms of a three to one reward to risk ratio whilst also obtaining a plausible target

and not having a stop that's going to be triggered

too easily. So for this example, something more like the 70th or 75th percentage rank might work.

That means a stop somewhere between 8.4 and 10%. So with that being said, let's enter some data into

the orange cells here and get some price outputs for a stop and a target for this stock.

the orange cells here and get some price outputs for a stop and a target for this stock and we're going to assume a nine percent stop here that gives us a 27 target and the current price is 645 spot

89 and so when those figures are entered you can see we get a stock value of 587 spot 76

and a target of 820 spot 28. now there is something else that we need to consider when setting stops and targets for individual stocks

and that is that during strong bull markets for example

all of your shorts can get stopped out purely because of market conditions

In fact this can of course happen in the reverse as well

And the thing to consider here is that just because the market might move significantly, we don't want to very quickly find ourselves in a situation where one side of our portfolio has been wiped out, since that's going to result in a huge increase in portfolio risk.

We need to maintain some balance in the portfolio based on our fundamental outlook.

And this is where some of the limits that I'm going to mention later come into play. So in those circumstances we have a few choices: either we abandon

or change our stops, we trade out and replace the ideas or we use different

stop measures to help navigate through the period. Now abandoning stops

entirely is obviously a bad idea since it allows human biases to run riot, and changing them is viable, but only with plenty of market experience.

Trading out and replacing the ideas can work well, but unless you have a lot of ideas ready in volatile conditions, it may not be possible to do that.

And lastly, using different measures can be a little

bit complex. But that being said let me explore that last option with you quickly. One of the ways to

deal with the issue of market triggered stops for individual positions is to combine ideas into

long short pairs or spreads and create stops and targets around the pair of trades rather than the individual trades.

That mitigates the market risk effect on stops somewhat since market moves that affect one

position in the pair should have the opposite effect in the opposing position in terms of profit

and loss. Now Anton briefly mentioned a way you can do this by looking at spreads and went through a

simple example that works when you assume an equal

number of shares on each side of the spread. What I want to do here is build on that slightly with a

more robust template for calculating stops and targets for spreads where you can choose the

exposure that you're taking to each side of the spread and work out reasonable stops and targets

from there. Now when I go through this stuff something to bear in mind is that spread

stops and targets are not a direct substitute for individual trade stops and targets. They should be

used in combination because they can help in certain circumstances as I mentioned previously.

So here is the spread template that you can use to conduct this analysis. Now as you can see there

are a few structural differences with this sheet compared to the single asset distribution of returns template.

Firstly, we need two sets of prices for both the long and short side of the trade. And you

can see here I've got Zinger adjusted closed prices in column B, which is where the prices

of the long side of the trade should go and I've got the align prices in or align

technology prices in column C where the short side of the trade goes. From those two columns

of price data returns are calculated for each stock in columns D and E and then a weighted

return is calculated for this mini portfolio of two stocks in column C.

Now you'll notice that I don't have any open high or low price data columns for this template

because it's unnecessary since we cannot calculate high to low price changes for spread data.

So we have to use close to close data only.

In column P there are a few orange cells that require our user input.

Firstly, in cells P2 and P3 you need to to fill in the gross exposures for the long and short

position respectively.

In this example, I've set the exposure to $10,000 on each side, and from those figures,

the percentage weighting is worked out in the cells below.

Those values are then used to generate constantly weighted portfolio returns, or spread returns

in column F, and those returns are then the returns used in our

distribution analysis and that in turn helps us find mental stops and targets

for the spread position in dollar terms. Now one thing to consider here with this

template is that when you come to pasting adjusted close prices for your

long and short positions in columns B and C respectively. You need to make sure that obviously the dates align.

So that means the dates are correct in column A for both sets of prices.

And you also need to make sure that the length of the data set is the same for both stocks,

which basically means you can only use a historical period that is common to both stocks,

both positions, and that's going to result in basically using the dates from whichever stock has the shorter data set. So let's have a look at this data now

and figure out what might be a reasonable mental stop and target for this pairs trade.

If we look at the histogram data and the summary statistics that we have, the first thing that

jumps out is that this trade as a pair is much

less volatile than the two component parts, which makes sense because we're

removing lots of market volatility by having a long and a short position. How

do we know it's less volatile? Well, we can see pretty clearly from the histogram

that it's very, very rare for this spread to return anything outside of plus

or minus 15 percent.

We can also see that the standard deviation is less than half of that which we had for the other stocks.

So let's have a look at our results now and see in terms of creating stops and targets.

If we were to use a stop that was historically triggered 30 percent of the time, the value would be 4.3%, 4.36% to be precise.

If we were to use a stop that was historically triggered 15% of the time, the value would be

7.39%. So that is the kind of range that we're working within. And let's say that for now we

settle on a 6% stop. That means our target should be three times that, so that's 18%.

And let's have a think about how that adds up. Well we can see that this spread has never actually achieved that within a monthly period,

so that's not a great start. But we also need to be aware of the fact that his stock

Historically, this trade has performed very poorly, but that doesn't mean that it's going to going forward.

Again, this comes back to the future percentages hopefully shifting in a beneficial way to you as a trader because you've done good fundamental work.

The other thing to consider here is that just because the target has never been attained in a month doesn't mean that it won't be over three months.

in a month doesn't mean that it won't be over three months. If we say that we need to obtain about a 5% to 6% return a month, then each month, based on historical close-to-close data, there's about a 15% chance of that happening.

Now, obviously, that isn't great statistically, but you've also got to remember that we can't generate high to low ranges here, and so the actual volatility range covered might be quite a bit higher and we just can't see that. As I've said a few times already this does come back to

a discretionary decision that's based upon probabilistic raw data. Only you can really

decide what might work. What we're trying to do here is give you the numerical tools to help you

make that decision. So let's just say for this

example we're going to stick with a 60% stop and an 18% target because over the next three months we

think that there's going to be enough volatility for that target to be attained and we don't want

to move the stop any lower because we want to give the pair room to move. If we enter those values in salespeople respectively then

we can see a dollar stop loss of $1,200 and a dollar target of $3,600. What does that mean?

Well it means that the mental stop loss you've chosen equates to a loss of $1,200 over the

two positions and at that point you should be cutting both positions. And this might

happen when one position makes $500 and one loses $1,700 for example. It might happen when both lose $600. It doesn't really matter.

The point is that the dollar stop loss is a cumulative stop over the two positions. The same is true for the target and the positions

can be scaled into when the soft target is reached and the stop is then shifted upwards.

So let's think about an example of that. We reach our target here if the cumulative P&L over the two

trades gets to plus $3,600. Let's say that happens during a strong bull market run

and that figure is reached through a $2 loss and a $3,800 win from the long.

If that's the case and I'm ignoring any deposits or withdrawals here,

then our short exposure will be $10,200 after a $200 loss because remember,

Our short exposure will be $10,200 after a $200 loss because remember the short has to increase in price and therefore exposure in order to generate a loss. And our long exposure will be $13,800 since a $3,800 profit on the long side increases exposure by a loss.

$3,800. So the target has been hit, what happens next? Well there are basically two decisions

to make here. Firstly, do you want to add to the position? And by position here I mean

the entire long short pair. Generally you want to add to your winners of course, subject

to position size and constraints. And so that leads us to the second decision which is if you are going

to add to the position in what proportion do you want to do it? If we update the gross exposure

cells for the long and short side to 13,800 and 10,200 respectively then you can see the weighting

of the significantly. There's now a 57.5% dollar weighting on the long side and a 42.5% dollar

weighting on the short side. Now let's say for example that we want to increase the overall

position sizes because the trade is working and we're looking to add another $10,000 gross exposure

across the two trades. You might want to realign the weightings to 50% each in that case or you might

want to overweight one side of the trade. There are lots of reasons why you might want to do either of

those and those decisions are going to be kind of up to you and the sort of portfolio that you're

running and the balance that you want in your portfolio. As an example though I'm going to assume

here that we think the long side of the trade is doing well and also the short side isn't doing too badly considering such a strong bull market backdrop.

Also, let's assume that if these positions aren't reasonably balanced in terms of dollar exposure terms, then it's detrimental to our portfolio construction and potentially exceeds preventative risk limits for beta and net exposure.

So for those reasons, in this example, we're going to rebalance this pair to be equally weighted.

Now, at the moment, given the long side has increased in exposure to $13,800

and the short side has increased to an exposure of $10,200,

we have a current gross exposure of $24,000 over the pair.

If we add $10,000, then we should have $34,000 over the pair.

And if it's equally weighted in cash terms, then both Align Technologies and Zinger should have a $17,000 exposure each.

So if we enter those values into cells P2 and P3 and we decide to

keep the stop percent the same at this point, then our stop from this point is minus $2,040.

But you need to remember that this value is applied on top of the previous P&L we had,

which was plus $3,600. So that means that the actual running stop for this pairs trade would be plus $1,560.

Now, hopefully that makes sense to you guys. And by the way, if you did decide to change the

weightings when you added exposure to the trades, then that would also change the historical spread

returns, and you'd

need to reassess to see if the same stop and target percentages were suitable. They would then be

applied on top of the prior profit. So for example if to some reason your new stop became 10%

which would be a $3,400 loss on a 34,000 exposure pair then your mental stop loss would actually be

$200 in P&L which is equal to the $3,600 original profit from reaching our first soft target minus

$3,400 which is the new stop. Again I hope that makes sense to you guys. I just want to give you

all the sort of options and various ways to handle these scenarios and you guys can kind of decide

what works for you. Now there are a couple of

things to consider here before I'm going to move on to looking at the average true

range percentage analysis which is firstly when you work out stops and

targets for spreads they have to just be mental notes because you can't program

them into your brokerage platform and secondly the spread calculations should

be looked at in combination with the individual stops and targets that you have for positions.

You want to be using the information in a combination in order to make well-informed decisions.

If you have individual position stops and targets, it's sometimes better also to keep those as mental or manual stops rather than automated ones through your brokerage platform

because it will then allow you to be flexible in scenarios like I've just described. Now whether you

run manual or automated stops on individual positions or a mixture it's up to you, I'm just

pointing out some considerations at this point. Okay guys let's move on to briefly talking through

an average true range percentage or ATRP for short

volatility analysis which is another way you guys can generate stops and targets for individual stocks.

This method is going to be quite a bit quicker than doing a distribution of returns analysis but

equally it doesn't really provide as much detail either. Now in this section I'm not going to

either. Now in this section I'm not going to actually show you how to build an ATRP sheet from scratch and instead I'm just going to jump straight into these

template sheets here and talk you through how you can use them. If you are

interested

generating an ATRP from scratch then you'll be able to see that in the IPLT

course and you can of course have a look

at how I've built these templates and backward engineer them if you want to do so. It really

isn't that difficult to do that and it will probably only take you about 30 minutes to figure

it all out. So as you can see in the spreadsheet here I've got two sheets that calculate ATRP

values using weekly and quarterly data respectively.

As Anton said in the previous video, weekly ATRP values provide a good guide for stock losses and quarterly ATRP values provide good estimates for targets.

And this is just something really that when you've been trading for a long time,

you just come to understand through practice rather than something that can be proven mathematically or anything like that.

Now, before we look at these sheets in any detail, let me briefly describe what the average true range percentage calculation is trying to capture.

Now, I think it will be fairly clear to you guys that having an understanding of the high to low range for an asset can be a useful metric for understanding volatility

because it tries to

capture the maximum price movement over a certain length of period. Now I say it tries to measure

the maximum price movement because it doesn't always succeed. There are times when stocks can

move significantly in the pre or post market and these price movements are ignored by a simple high

to low range.

So all that the true range percentage calculation does is adjust for that.

So it finds the actual maximum price movement over a period including any moves that happen

outside of market hours.

The average true range percentage is then a simple average of those true range percentages

over x number of periods. So let's

look at the weekly ATRP template sheet now to try and make that a little bit clearer.

Okay so in the left hand columns what I have here is weekly price data for Align technologies going

back to or from I should say December the 20th 2021 and as we had in the distribution of returns template,

you can see the open high and closed prices in columns B to F. In column G we have a calculation

column which is simply the high to low range for each period, so each week in this case. And in

column H we have the true range percentage calculation for each week.

And if we take a look at the formula in cell H2 to see what it looks like, then you get this.

Now this formula might look complicated, but it's really not. Remember, the goal of the true range is to find the maximum range over a period

inclusive of any out of hours market moves. So you can see that the first part of

the formula here is trying to find the maximum between three values. The first value is whatever

value we see in the adjacent cell in column G, so that's just our intra-period high to low range.

The second value is the high of the current period minus the close of the previous period in its absolute format.

And the third value is the close of the previous period minus the low of the current period in its absolute format.

Using the close of the previous periods makes sure that any out of hours moves are accounted for within the calculation. And then this formula is basically

just taking the maximum range from the intraperiod high to low, the previous close to the low,

and the previous close to the high. That yields a maximum true range. And then to

express that as a percentage, we just divide it by the current periods open, which

is what the last part of the formula does. Now hopefully that makes sense to you guys,

but if not just take some time to look at it again when you download this file.

So after we've generated a time series of true range percentage values in column H,

we can then take averages over various periods of time, which I've done over here in this box to

the right hand side. The reason why we take averages is so that we don't rely on a single data point to come

up with an analytical conclusion like a stop or target.

And I've chosen to take averages over various periods here so that it gives us an insight

into how the ATRP for this stock has changed information for us to use in terms of picking an appropriate

market. So what this data here is saying is that Align Technologies has an ATRP value

of 9% over the last month, which is four weeks of data. It has an ATRP of 8.42% over the

last quarter, which is the last 13 weeks of data, and so on.

As I've mentioned before, when we look at data like this, it's all about finding a balance between using more recent data and enough data that the conclusions are statistically significant.

The balance is obviously up to you, but what I would say is that for this stock,

it looks like the weekly ATRP has been about 8% to 10% through almost its entire trading history.

And so picking a stock value in that range is probably pretty sensible.

Now, what you guys might remember is that when we looked at this same stock using the DOR analysis,

we actually got to exactly the same conclusion of about an 8-10% stop being reasonable for this stock.

So we know we're on the right track here and like I said we know this works from experience

but if in doubt you can of course always double check the numbers against each other

using both the DOR and ATRP analysis. Let's have a quick look at the quarterly ATRP values now for aligned technologies.

All the analysis is the same here, but I just want to talk through the ATRP values that we're seeing quickly.

So firstly, with quarterly data, we clearly have much higher ATRP numbers.

That should be obvious since the volatility is bound to be larger over longer periods of time.

We also have quite a bit more variation in the

results over different time frames. But that's actually largely due to mostly the one-year

quarterly ATRP value which only uses four data points and so we can sort of disregard that as

fairly unreliable since there are only four periods in the calculation. That being said, some of these other values are being skewed a bit by including periods of exceptional market volatility, such as in the 2020.

And if we think about what our stop range was based on the weekly ATRP values that we had,

in the previous sheet, then we're looking in the range of 8-10%. So given that, we want

a target that is around 3 times that figure, so about 24-30%. And what we can ask ourselves

is does that add up with what we're seeing here in the quarterly ATRPs? And I would say

in this case, sort of. If you were to calculate ATRPs on a quarterly basis without including historical

market crashes then it certainly would, but we don't want to do that because it biases

the data. So what we have then is a weekly ATRP suggesting a stop somewhere in the range

of 8-10% and a quarterly ATRP suggesting a target of somewhere in the range of 35-40%.

Now there are many ways you could approach this situation using the data available to

come up with an answer and my general advice here is that as long as you're using common

sense and logic the answer you come up with will be valid.

One way you could look at this data is to simply take some kind of middle ground.

So what if we were to take the top end of the stop and the bottom end of the target?

That would mean a stop of 10% and a target of 35%. Does that still provide at least a three times

ratio? Yes. So maybe that's a reasonable solution to consider. Another way you could look at this

is that you might say the current market environment isn't applicable to historic periods of huge volatility

and therefore you don't think the target generated by the quarterly ATRP should be skewed as high as

it is. One way to tackle that is simply by using a three times stop value that you're happy with

and ignoring the quarterly data and another is calculating what a quarterly value might look

like when you don't include those historic market crashes.

You've got to be quite careful if you do that.

Typically, I advise using as much data as possible, like I said, for statistical significance.

But what I'm trying to get across to you guys is that there are a number of ways to approach this problem.

Don't get too bogged down in the details.

Just make sure that you choose something sensible and that it's based on the volatility of the stock and then you stick to it.

So now let's discuss how you can actually use these ATRP templates in practice, meaning how can you actually import new or different stock data into them and then go through an analysis.

import new or different stock data into them and then go through an analysis. So I'm going to start with the weekly template first and this one's really

simple. All you need to do here to update the data is remove all the current

data you see in columns A to F by selecting it and pressing delete on the

keyboard and then replacing that data with new price data downloaded from Yahoo

Finance or another appropriate source. So let's do that now for our long Zinger position.

As before, to obtain Zinger price data I'm just going to head over to Yahoo Finance and then use

the search bar at the top to navigate to the Zinger stock page. From there within the historical data tab

we want weekly prices this time and again the entire price history

available. After that you can just click apply and download and then a

downloaded file in Excel and at this point before importing the data into our

template there's a couple of adjustments that we need to make. Firstly I'm going to

make the date column slightly wider by clicking and dragging the intersection of

column A and B to the right slightly. Then we need to arrange this data in descending order, meaning

the latest weekly data is displayed at the top of the sheet. As we've done before, to do that,

you just select any one of the column titles and then go to data on the ribbon followed by filter.

And then using the filter option in column a the date column

that you just choose to sort the data from newest to oldest now at this point you might see an

incomplete period of data at the top of the sheet and to deal with that you can just delete it

fortunately here i don't have to deal with that and so now the data is ready to copy across to our

template but remember we don't need the volume column so we're is ready to copy across to our template. But remember we

don't need the volume column so we're only going to copy across columns A to F.

To do that I'm just selecting those columns and pressing Ctrl+C on the

keyboard to copy the data and then I'm going to open the weekly ATRP template

and paste this data into the sheet. Now we need to make sure that this data is

pasted as values in order to

keep all the original formatting the same. So here I'm going to right click column A and choose to

paste as values using the 123 clipboard option. So with our Zinger data in the file we just need to

double check the calculation columns and make sure the series of formulas that we see in columns G and H are the correct length for our new price data set.

Column G needs to be the same length as the price data,

and so in this case we want to delete these redundant formulas from rows 526 down.

The reason why these formulas are there, remember,

is just because the previous stock in the template, which was the Lion Technologies,

had a much longer data set. In column H we do almost exactly the same thing, but this

time we need to remove the contents of the cells from row 525 down instead of 526. The

reason being that the true range percentage formulas in column H require price data from

the previous period, and so the time series has to be one period shorter.

If we take a look at the ATRP values in our summary box on the right hand side for this stock,

we can see again that we get to a fairly similar conclusion to that which we got with the DOR

analysis for this stock. So the range we're looking at here is somewhere between 7 and 9%

analysis for this stock. So the range we're looking at here is somewhere between 7% and 9%. And previously with the DOR analysis, we assumed a stop of 8% was reasonable and

that fits in perfectly again with our kind of range here.

However, we do get an interesting bit of extra detail here that

we kind of didn't see in the DIR analysis. And that is that within the last quarter or so,

the volatility in this stock has been going quite a bit higher based on ATRP values. Now,

a quarter of data isn't really enough to make us shift our analysis for what value of stock we use,

but what it does provide is a little more confidence that we might be getting into this

stock at the right time since volatility

is trending up. Okay so let's go over to the quarterly template now and this one does take

just a little bit more work in order to import prices correctly. So to begin with just as with

the weekly ATRP template when you're looking to analyze updated or different stock data entirely,

the first thing to do with this is delete the data already in the template sheet.

Again, that means selecting columns A to F and pressing delete on the keyboard to delete the contents of those cells.

Now, in order to import quarterly price data, we're actually going to have to download monthly price data and perform a number of manipulations in order to get it ready to use.

So I'm going to go through our long zinger example here to show you how to do this.

Firstly, we need to head back to Yahoo Finance.

And this time, instead of downloading weekly price data for the stock we want, we're going to download monthly prices.

So here, all I'm doing is from the same page we were on before just

changing the frequency to monthly from weekly and then making sure we're still looking at the

maximum time period available and then clicking apply and downloading the data. After that I'm

just going to open the file again and to begin with I'm just going to do exactly the same as we did

with our weekly data which was firstly to expand the date column width and secondly to add a filter so that we can

sort the dates from newest to oldest, meaning in descending order.

With that done, we again want to make sure that any incomplete periods are removed, but

here again we don't have an issue with that.

So at this stage, what we actually need to do

is perform a manipulation on our open high and low columns of data which is going to help us transform

the data from monthly to quarterly values. So in columns h i and j i'm just going to head the columns

open high and low respectively. The open is going to be recalculated for each month as the

open from two months before so in cell H2 the formula will just be equals B4.

The high is going to be recalculated for the latest three months of data so the

formula in cell I2 will be equals max open brackets c2 to c4.

And finally, the new low is going to be the minimum of the latest three months of data.

And so the formula in cell J2 will be equals min open brackets d2 to d4.

four. Now from there all of these formulas can just be copied down to the end of the price series

and then all you need to do is just double check at the bottom of these series that the formulas

are working correctly and that we don't have any errors or weird values. Now you can see here that

the final two open prices are displaying zero values and that's because the formulas that we're using in those

cells are trying to reference prices that don't exist and so those two values can just be deleted.

Okay so the formulas all look good now and so we're ready to update the open high and low values we

see in columns b2d with these new numbers. To do that, I'm just going to copy columns H to J and paste them as values into columns B to D.

And then having done that, we can actually delete columns H to J entirely.

All right, so we're almost there now.

There's just one more manipulation to make before we copy this data into our quarterly template

and that is that we need to remove some of this monthly data so that we're only left with quarterly

data points. Now I think the easiest way to do that is to filter out unwanted months of the year so

basically we're only left with four quarters in each annual period. Now to do that I'm going to

use a formula in column h which just returns a number value for each month corresponding to the

date seen in column A and the formula we can use for that which I'm going to

type here into cell H2 is =MONTH then a cell reference, the cell

reference for this one is going to be A2. Now as you can see when that formula is entered

it returns a value of 12, the 12th month in the year which is December.

And that is because that's the month that's defined in the corresponding date cell, so cell A2.

So with that formula entered we can copy it down and now since we have all of the month values

defined in a new column what we can do is filter that column for the months of

the year that we want to remove so that we're only left with quarterly data points.

Now to do that we need to reapply a filter to the headings in this table and then select

the filter in our new column column H and from there what we can do is uncheck all of the months

and then recheck just the months that we want to remove so for example if i were to check the value

of one here and press ok the data table would only show price data from january in each year

and then i could choose to delete that data so in this case what we want to do is make sure we keep the latest data available which is in December.

So what I'm going to do here is check all of the data for the months of

November and October and then leave September since

September is one quarter behind December. Then I'm going to check the

months August and July.

and leave June, and then check May and April and leave March, and then finally check February and January.

So basically you can see here that what I'm doing is selecting all the months of the year that I want to remove,

so that we're only left with quarterly data based on the fact that we want to keep December data,

because that's our latest month of data.

If I press OK now, you can see that all the data I deselected, which is the months of December, September, June and March, no longer appear in the table.

So all I'm going to do at this point is delete all of this data by selecting row two, pressing control shift and down on the keyboard and then right clicking within that data and selecting delete row.

delete row. After that all that's needed is to remove the filter and you'll see that we're just left with quarterly data which is now ready to copy across to

our quarterly ATRP template. So to copy that data across it's the same data just

use ctrl C to copy the columns A to F once they're selected and then paste them as values into column A of the template sheet.

So similarly to weekly data, we need to check our calculation columns in G and H again now in the template and just make sure that they're the correct length to match our price data.

our price data. Now in this case we need to delete some formulas again so row 42 down for column G our high to low range and from 41 down for our true range

column column H. With all of that done we can finally check the quarterly ATRP

values we have for this stock which looks like they range from about 27 to

31% which is quite a tight range and if we think about the stock value obtained

from our weekly atrp it was anywhere in the range of seven to nine percent and so just by multiplying

that range by three we do actually get pretty close to the suggested target using quarterly atrp

values and you can approach these figures in exactly the same way as I talked about to the previous stock, Align Technologies.

It really just boils down to a discretionary decision that should be guided by the volatility seen in weekly and quarterly ATRP values.

And as long as you're using common sense and logic to get to your answer, you're going to be fine.

What I would say, though, about the quarterly Zinger data that we have here is that it is a very short time series, which doesn't really inspire confidence in terms of generating statistically significant analytical outcomes, I should say.

So that is something to bear in mind. if you're dealing with particularly short time series of data like this, is that you probably want to weight the weekly ATRP values

a bit more than what you're seeing in the quarterly sheet.

What I mean by that is, once you've come up with a stock value using the

weekly ATRP, it might be a better idea just to make your target

it equal to three times your stop rather than worrying too much about the quarterly data.

You might now be asking what constitutes a short time series.

I can't tell you that exactly, but for me I do like to see generally in any data that I use at

least 75 to 100 data points in order to try and get some statistical significance out of the data

that I'm using. But like I said, everyone is different.

Now, guys, I mentioned at the beginning of the video that I'm also going to talk about some other preventative risk management metrics besides just stops and targets.

So let's do that now.

I'm going to bring up another spreadsheet here, which hopefully you guys remember from video 20, our beta calculation lesson.

As a reminder, what we're looking at here really is a portfolio risk monitor.

In the orange cells, we enter our portfolio positions with longs in the top section and shorts in the bottom.

And the details included here are the company name and ticker, the stock beta value, the current price,

and the number of shares held in a stock.

As a quick reminder, the stock beta value is a measure of sensitivity of a stock to the market,

so a value of 1 would suggest that for a 1% move in the market, the stock also moves 1% in the same direction on average.

I explained things in a lot more detail in video 20 regarding beta and its uses, its drawbacks, and how you can

calculate it. So if you can't remember, just head back to that video and give it another look.

So from those details in the orange cells, various calculations are made in the adjacent white cells,

including gross exposure, net dollar exposure, net dollar weighting, and weighted beta calculations.

net dollar exposure, net dollar weighting and weighted beta calculations. Again just as a reminder at this point the gross exposure of a position is the current price multiplied by the number of shares.

The net exposure of a position is the gross exposure multiplied by one for a long or minus one for a

short. So basically short positions end up having negative net exposures. The net dollar weighting is the net exposure divided by

the gross exposure in the portfolio and the weighted beta is the beta of the stock multiplied

by the net weight and this is effectively kind of a volatility weighted net weight value if you like.

At the portfolio level the sum of all of the individual position gross exposures equates to the portfolio gross exposure.

And equally, the sum of all the individual position net exposures equates to the portfolio net exposure.

Likewise, the sum of all the individual net dollar weights equates to the portfolio net dollar weight.

And also the sum of all of the individual net weighted beta values equates to the portfolio net dollar weight and also the sum of all of the individual net weighted beta values

equates to the portfolio beta. So let's have a look at these metrics for this portfolio

in turn. Firstly we can see the gross dollar exposure in cell G33 is equal to 99,000

$810. So basically this trader is running about $100,000 of risk. Now we don't know what the

situation is behind the scenes for this trader and what I mean by that is we don't actually know

what amount of margin is deposited in the account in order to achieve that $100,000 gross exposure.

But if he or she is based in the US then their gross exposure will be capped at two times their margin. So at a

minimum that would mean that the account has $50,000 of margin. If however this trader is based

in a country that allows CFDs and these are indeed CFD positions in the portfolio then the leverage

limit is actually likely to be much higher, perhaps up to 10 times.

However, does that mean that it's sensible to use that leverage? Most definitely not. If this trader was using 10 times leverage, then the deposited margin only needs to be $10,000 to put on this $100,000 of risk.

And that might sound good, but it also means that the portfolio would only need to drop in value by 10% for the entire margin to be wiped out.

So that's why portfolio gross exposure limits are essential.

Using some leverage can be useful in order to increase the risk and opportunity of your portfolio, especially when we're running a long, short book.

But it does need to be monitored and limited to prevent sort of catastrophic loss for a well run long short portfolio about two to four times leverage for

stocks is okay going much higher than that becomes pretty dangerous and when you're starting out as

new traders you want to keep the leverage on the lower end of that range and then

you can build into it over time subject to your sort of own success. So let's say for example this

trader here is starting out and he's deposited $50,000 on margin. Having a portfolio gross exposure

of $99,000 in leverage factor of almost two that's well within an appropriate gross exposure or leverage

limit. However, if he's only deposited $20,000, then his gross exposure is almost five times his

margin deposit. And he's almost definitely running too much risk. If the portfolio value dropped by

10% in that example, his margin would half. Obviously, when you guys are thinking about gross exposure and leverage

limits for your own portfolios they're going to be completely up to you but as I said as a guide

exceeding four times leverage even as an accomplished retail trader is probably unwise. Let's think about net dollar or net cash exposure now and this metric clearly gives us an insight into how long or short we are on a net basis across the portfolio and the general principle

here is that as long short traders and portfolio managers we want to always have

some balance across the portfolio which is part of what makes the strategy so

good because it can be traded

successfully through all market conditions. So here the dollar net exposure is $114 which in net

weight terms is only 0.11% and based on that this portfolio is basically market neutral in its

current state. Although as I said in the beta video this is by no means a full story because

it doesn't actually account for the individual asset betas and of course the portfolio

beta. In practice you can have portfolios that are roughly cash neutral like this one but yet on a

beta adjusted basis they're significantly net short or significantly net long. Now as it happens in

this example the portfolio beta is almost zero as well so So in its current setup, we would expect this portfolio to

be very market neutral, meaning that its value should move pretty much independently to the

stock market. We can only assume then that in this case, the manager of this portfolio doesn't really

have a fundamental bias or thesis about the market direction going forward, whether that's long or

short. You guys know by now that

generally you should have at least some bias in terms of market direction, because if you don't,

it probably means that you just haven't done your macro fundamental work properly. But that being

said, there are of course circumstances whereby you might want to be very neutral, like in this

portfolio. Now, in terms of portfolio beta, for the most part,

a sensible range to operate in is plus 30% to minus 30%, or in decimal format, plus 0.3 to minus 0.3.

So a beta value in the range of, let's say, plus to minus 5%, like this portfolio,

we would say is very market neutral. A 10 percent tilt in either

direction represents a fairly weak bias whether it's long or short and anything above 20 percent

is quite a strong bias and then outside the limits of plus or minus 30 percent starts to represent

such a strong bias on market direction that the benefits of long short portfolio management start

to deteriorate and so I would say that range should only be exceeded in exceptional circumstances

or with incredible eviction. It can be applied to the dollar or cash net weight in this portfolio

which in this example is 0.11% as I said before. However as I said in

video 20 net cash weight is just kind of a crude measure of portfolio bias since it doesn't really

account for the basis of individual stocks and for that reason we can actually extend the acceptable

range of net cash weight to something more like 50% so plus 50% to minus 50%, simply because it just isn't as effective

as a measure to capture market risk or bias in the portfolio. Beta is the value that you should be

paying more attention to, but you must also remember that beta isn't infallible and there are

some drawbacks of using beta and if you want to find out more about that then you need to go back

to video 20. So let's think about a scenario here in this portfolio where these limits might be

broken and what we can do about it. So let's say that the market rallies strongly by 10% over a

couple of months and as a result increase in value. Now at this point I'm just going to arbitrarily increase the

prices of these long stocks in turn to reflect that scenario now. So let's put the prices at 15,

98, 36, 22, 115 and 240. Now we're also going to assume here that a couple of this trader's short positions have done

quite well over the period and stayed flat but Lenar Corporation and Best Buy have gone up in

price by 10% with the market and they've ended up both being stopped out. If I delete those two

stocks from the portfolio now look what happens to the portfolio beta it's gone from a value of minus

five percent to a value of 48 percent if our beta values then are perfectly accurate and the market

then corrects back to where it was dropping around 10 percent then in theory if we do nothing to change

the structure of this portfolio it should decrease in value by 5%, given that our new beta value is close to 0.5.

Now that might not sound like much, but it doesn't account for leverage.

If you're four times levered, then that's going to mean your margin decreases by 20%, which then seems a lot more significant when you think about how easily avoidable this scenario

was. All that would have had to happen was to rebalance some of the position weightings or

reinstate a couple of new shorts in the portfolio and then beta would have been balanced. Now,

there are obviously an infinite number of scenarios that could happen in the real world

that would represent a similar thing.

But the point here is really that it's very important to pay attention to your risk limits.

They're called preventative risk limits for a reason because they are a proactive rather than reactive approach to making sure losses are limited. Gross exposure and leverage limits

prevent excess losses because they control the amplification

effects of leverage on downturns in portfolio value net exposure and beta limits prevent excess losses

because they limit how exposed our portfolios are to market moves that we may or may not get right

and even if we do as we saw in the previous example we can then actually get whipsawed with our stops quite

quickly and lose much more than we should preventative risk management metrics like these

and stops and targets are all there to help improve our trading performance

and that will then be reflected in performance metrics like our

R scores and our percent winning trades and many others I'm going to go into in a bit more detail

in a couple of videos time. So that's all I really wanted to cover in this video. Hopefully that all

makes sense and you guys can see the importance of PRM measures. The key points to take away from this

video are really firstly that you need to make sure you generate sensible stops and targets based on

the volatility of assets that you're trading.

You want to set hard stops and soft targets to try and help remove the human biases that we tend to have.

However, we can't just pick a level of the stop and target and hope that it works.

And neither can we pick a one-size-fits-all that we can use across all trades in all conditions.

You need to choose stops and

targets based on the volatility of the underlying assets. And all assets have different volatilities

and those volatilities change with time as well. And that's why you need to do volatility analyses

like distribution of returns analysis and average true range percentage analysis so that you can

figure out what numbers

might work for different stocks at different times.

And remember guys, the stops and targets you choose for each position should find a balance

that means that the stops aren't triggered too easily, but the targets are still attainable.

Now despite these values being driven by hard data, as you will have gathered from this video

and Anton's presentation previously, there is definitely a discretionary component that

you'll need to use in combination with that hard data.

The data itself doesn't provide clear-cut answers.

You need to be able to think about what the data means and fine-tune the outcomes on a

discretionary basis if you think it's appropriate.

Now on that note, whilst we're aiming for

hard stops and soft targets in our individual positions we also have to

understand that market dynamics might dictate that adjustments need to be made

to stop us being stopped out on multiple longs or shorts at the same time.

Again the decision you make on how to handle that is discretionary but one

method that we looked at in this video is to split trades into long-short pairs and monitor stops and targets on paired positions that are relatively market neutral.

brokerage platform because firstly brokers don't support stops on spread positions but secondly when using individual and spread stops and targets in

combination there is no choice really but to add in a discretionary component in

the decision-making process. Now I'm not trying to say here that all of this work

just leads to discretionary choices that don't matter and don't help us with

human biases. Far from it, in fact.

What I am trying to say is that

we should be using volatility to

remove human error

but equally we have

have to be realistic that there will be when has to be used. Otherwise, we might actually end up

making huge mistakes and doing things like letting all of our shorts or some of our shorts and longs

get stopped out all at once, which then subsequently puts portfolio risk through the roof.

That was the scenario we played out towards the end of the video within the context of looking

at other PRM risk metrics as well, namely gross exposure limits,

net exposure limits and portfolio beta limits. Now remember guys that these limits are there to help

guide us and prevent thoughtless mistakes and the limits that you set for these metrics are again

discretionary and should be based on your own trading and risk profile but hopefully that being

said the ranges that I talked

about in the scenario we discussed at the end there will give you a good idea of what some sensible

numbers might be. Anyway guys that's all I wanted to say on all of this stuff today. I hope you guys

enjoyed the video and I'll see you later in the video series where I'm going to talk about trading

statistics and performance measures.

where I'm going to talk about trading statistics and performance measures.

Okay, guys. So welcome back to the desk. Let's have a quick recap there. So what we looked at was trading psychology and risk management, preventative risk management measures. So what do we look at first? We looked at human psychology and the tendencies of human

psychology as they pertain to the skill set of money management. Okay. So we looked at how

this works in practice with applying the distribution of returns analysis, the average true range percentage

calculations in setting sensible, hard stop losses and targets for individual stocks and

also for spreads on stocks.

So what we did, we discussed how to treat stops and targets also as part of an overall long-short portfolio, an overall long-short stock portfolio.

But it is important to remember always, because we are long-short portfolio managers and traders, that we don't just apply blanket rule across the board.

We don't just apply all hard stops and targets to all positions in a long-short portfolio

all the time across the entire portfolio because we will obviously have correlation in the portfolio. It is totally situational.

And there isn't a rule book that you can just buy

and just put into place all of the rules that a book tells you.

Okay.

So for example, you can't go into a long short portfolio

dynamic and say, for example, five out of six, five or six positions out of 10 have to all have

hard stock losses and soft targets on them. It just doesn't work like that. Okay. If you try to

apply a rule book here, guys, where the rule applies to all stocks all the time in all situations. You're just going

to get whipsawed by the market because you're running a long short portfolio and the market's

going to go up and down. And you can't have a situation where you're just going to get stopped

out on all your shorts when the market goes up. And if the market reverses and goes down you just get stopped out

on all your longs. So the best you can do here all the time is just take a balanced cautious

and realistic approach. Okay so Chris also in this video showed you how to work out the distribution of returns analysis and the ATRP

in terms of the numbers in a spreadsheet. So you can actually use this now as a template

going forward to calculate sensible and taking a well-balanced approach, a cautious approach,

a well-balanced approach, a cautious approach, calculate sensible stop losses and realistic targets. So he did this both for single stocks and also for spreads. So if you are going to run

long, short stock portfolios or in the rest of the world, CFD positions, what's going to happen?

Going forward, you're going to be using these templates to make sure that you're calculating

volatility properly and calculating sensible stop losses and realistic targets over the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

Now, Chris also went through some other metrics as well, Preventative risk management metrics and also some

performance metrics. So Chris looked at targeting an R score of a minimum of 1.5, okay, and a win-loss ratio over time, over many trades, a target of 60% win rate and 40% loss rate. These are achievable targets.

They are realistic. And they are sensible targets as parameters that you should be aiming

for over the long term. And in terms of preventative risk management, what is actually happening here is if

you're setting those targets, you are preventing yourself from ending up in a situation that over

a long period of time, over many trades, becomes untenable. Okay, so an

our score minimum of 1.5 and a win-loss rate of 6040. Now, Chris also looked at gross exposure limits.

If you're in the United States, your gross exposure limits on a long, short portfolio, a stock portfolio,

is going to be two times whatever the number is you have deposited in your account, two times that rate.

you have deposited in your account two times that rate. You don't have a choice. That's the limit that brokers set for you. In the rest of the world, when rest of world retail traders are trading CFDs,

the exposure limit can be higher. It can be up to five times what you have in your account. But we would say a sensible approach initially

is to only go for a maximum of four times what you put in your account. Okay. So set a gross

exposure limit that's sensible, please. And make sure you stick to it. Also, Chris looked at

beta adjusted net exposure limits. And he mentioned that the kind of maximum

is plus or minus 30% beta-adjusted position exposure limit in your portfolio, your net

exposure limit. So try to stay within that. If you start to see yourself getting close to 30

or above 30, it means you're bringing a lot of market bias

into your portfolio. And it means that you're not really necessarily getting the single stock

bias, the idiosyncratic bias in your portfolio. And if you go too far either way, then it

essentially becomes a market bet. You're not really using the stocks to get a stock return.

You're using the stocks to get a market return. Chris also mentioned cash for cash net exposure

and looked at a kind of plus or minus limit of maximum 50%. You need to know where this is as

well. You can only really go up to that type of number

if you really know what your beta adjusted net is. So, for example, you can have a plus 45%

cash for cash net exposure, but in the background, the actual beta adjusted net exposure might, for example,

be only 15%. That's okay. You just have to make sure that you know where both of them are,

and both of them are under control. Okay. So we're going to move on now to the next video,

and we're going to be exploring more aspects of psychology in trading. And specifically, what we're going to be looking at is eliminating emotion and staying objective. So previously, we've mentioned a few times about reactive risk management, RRM.

and how it's impossible to teach that in a video series.

But what is possible with RRM is to give you some sort of perspective

on how you should think about handling your positions

when things start to pan out through the life of a trade.

So when a position becomes a winner, loser, or a nothing position. And what we call this is staying in

motion. So you need to start thinking about your trading account as a business. So let's go over

to the next video. And Chris, after the next video, is actually going to give you spreadsheet classes, two spreadsheet

classes on how to manage your trading account as a business. And I'll see you back at the desk

towards the end of the video series. Thank you.