Okay, so welcome back to the screen.

We've come to the end of leading indicators now in the PTM video series.

So let's have a recap of what we've learned so far.

This is a very natural gap and natural time to do a nice recap

and to have a look at where we've come from in the PTM video series and where we're going.

So this will be very familiar to you now.

We have our leading indicator dashboard and of course on the left-hand side, we covered early on in the video series all of our U. our US leading indicators, our money markets indicators,

our surveys and our cyclical commodity prices. And we also covered international leading indicators,

or at least some of them or the main ones, that being the European Economic Sentiment Indicator and the China Manufacturing PMI, Official versus

Kaixin, in the category of surveys. And we also covered in money markets, China, real interest

rates. So further work, obviously, for you guys in your own time is to look at money markets in Japan, UK, Germany, and Italy,

and look at the bond indicators and use the downloaded material to cover those bond markets.

That's further work for you in your own time, and also indicators that you should be following

on a weekly to monthly basis. Also, with cyclical commodity prices, you have all the downloads

available for the main international front month futures contracts for international commodities

like Brent Oil, London Metal Exchange Copper, and Shanghai Copper.

Now, it's always good at a time like this, seeing as though we've covered a lot of information,

just to see a big picture map of where everything that we've learned fits in.

So, here we have a time lag chart where we have our leading indicators

that we've covered so far, leading into the monthly reported coincident indicators,

leading into our quarterly reported lagging indicators. And you can see on the left hand side under leading indicators,

what we've covered so far.

So money markets, both US and international.

Surveys, US and international.

Commodities, US and international.

and also stock market and forex.

So forex would be our US dollar trade-weighted index.

And the stock market would be primarily the US stock market,

so the S&P 500, but also international stock markets.

And we've included these under leading indicators

because they are leading indicators in themselves.

For our coincidence indicators, you'll see that we

have inflation in there, which we covered earlier in the video series when we were looking at cyclical

commodity prices. And we know that CPI and PPI is reported monthly and that it's a coincident

indicator. Additional to that, we have something called the ESR, the Employment Situation Report.

And if you go to the downloads area for this video, you'll get a download PDF, which includes

all of the coincidence indicators in the US explained and broken down with sources.

Inflation is there and so is the

employment situation report. Now the employment situation report covers

something called non-farm payrolls and the unemployment rate but also private

sector and government sector employment. And non-farm payrolls is reported as

well as the unemployment rate on a monthly basis as part of the ESR, as part of the employment situation report.

And non-farm payrolls is a very focused on number by professionals in the stock market because it tells us the amount of jobs that have been added to the US economy in the last month.

However, the focus is definitely over-exaggerated in financial markets, because we do actually get

something on a weekly basis called initial and continuing jobless claims. So we get jobless claims on a weekly basis, and we get the ESR on a monthly

basis. And what the jobless claims number tells us is on a weekly basis, how many people in the

United States are filing for unemployment insurance. So by the time we actually get to the employment situation report, where that tells us

how many jobs have been added in the previous month, so ESR is reported on the first Friday

of each month, and the data is for the previous month. By the time we get to that, we've had four weekly jobless claims reports since the previous ESR,

since the previous employment situation report.

And what that means is, is that by the time we get to the ESR, there should be no surprises

before.

by the market, and there generally never is. And what's funny is that it gets a disproportionately

large amount of attention from the media in general. So the ESR gets a disproportionately

large amount of media attention and even sucks in a lot of professionals to pay a disproportionately

large amount of attention and importance to it. Really, there should be no surprises

of what's going to happen to non-farm payrolls and the unemployment rates on a monthly basis

because we have weekly, initial and continuing jobless claims.

And yes, of course, even the Fed is watching jobless claims.

So the Fed should not be surprised by the non-farm payrolls number either,

nor the unemployment rate when it's reported on the first Friday of every month for the previous month.

Now, all of this is explained in the Coincident Indicators Download

PDF. Also, you can get the non-farm payrolls data, the unemployment data. You can get jobless claims,

initial continuing in spreadsheet downloads in the downloads area as well. So you can do further work on those in your spare time.

We've also included a couple of more coincidence indicators.

We've included durable goods and shipments

and industrial production,

which is reported monthly as well.

You'll find those in the spreadsheet downloads as well.

Take a look at that data, research it in the PDF,

understand what those numbers are all about.

Essentially, these are numbers that are confirmation indicators.

So the coincidence indicators are confirmation indicators

of what our leading indicators predicted in the past will happen in the future.

And then on the right-hand side, you can see our lagging indicators, which are reported

quarterly and looking back over the previous quarter. And what do they include? Yes, that includes company earnings and gross domestic product GDP growth.

These are indicators that are reported last and they are lagging indicators.

So our leading indicators forecast our coincident or confirmation indicators and our lagging indicators.

or confirmation indicators and our lagging indicators. Our coincidence indicators give us confirmation of what we saw

in our leading indicators in preceding months.

And our lagging indicators tell us what happened previously

in the last quarter,

and what our leading indicators predicted

and our coincidence indicators confirmed prior to the lagging indicators actually reported.

So how does this all fit together?

Well, prices of money markets, commodities, stocks and forex are leading indicators in themselves because they price in the expectation of risk

based on forward-looking projections of earnings and GDP growth. So for stocks themselves,

this means their changes in forward-looking earnings or EPS, earnings per share growth.

forward-looking earnings or EPS, earnings per share growth.

And leading indicator surveys, which are obviously part of our leading set,

are reported monthly, but they're a key driver of risk sentiment and prices because they are forward-looking.

And prices of money markets, commodities, stocks, and forex lead coincident and lagging

indicators. Coincident and lagging indicators essentially either confirm or deny the market's

expectations that are embedded in the prices of the instruments themselves. However, it is still important to stay on top

of coincidence and lagging indicators

because essentially,

coincidence indicators are our confirmation indicators

and lagging indicators should either confirm or deny

what we've seen throughout the time lag series going from leading to confirmation

to lagging. Now, if you remember our time horizon and volatility chart from a trader's perspective

and from an investor's perspective, this should, given the work that we've done so far in the PTM video series, start to become a lot clearer as to why we exist as traders and portfolio managers within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

So just think about it for a moment in terms of leading indicators and prices.

So prices of instruments in money markets, the stock markets, commodities and forex.

Think of that in terms of leading our monthly and quarterly reports.

So, for example, if you pick a day right now, so the day that you're watching this video

series and you say, okay, I have a trade idea in a stock and I think I should be buying this

particular stock. Well, what you're looking as part of your analysis at is a

what's going to happen to the future earnings of that company. And that is affected by both

macroeconomic and microeconomic factors. And their next earnings report could be up to one quarter

away from now. So today's date, when we are entering a position, we are looking for a stock to actually perform before the earnings report.

So we enter that position now. So in the next 20 to 60 days, so if we look 20 days ahead from now

and 60 days ahead from now, that's the volatility we want to be exposed to

because our prices are going to predict the earnings report.

By the time earnings come out,

we already know that earnings are going up

if we are choosing to buy a stock.

And this is why you see so many times in the market,

for example, a stock that goes up into its earnings report.

And then when the company reports better than expected earnings, the stock either goes sideways or goes down.

Or even at the macroeconomic level, when, for example, the stock market goes up into the jobs report number, so the

employment situation report, and we get a better than expected non-farm payrolls number,

the market sometimes responds by going up for the first one hour, and then the market goes down afterwards and even lower than it was previously on the day,

or even goes down further than it was on the week. And essentially, what is happening here

is that prices are leading the report themselves that is reported on a quarterly or monthly basis.

themselves that is reported on a quarterly or monthly basis. So prices are leading in themselves and then we get profit-taking because everything is priced in once the report cuts out.

It confirms what we already expected and prices are reflecting the expectation of the market.

and prices are reflecting the expectation of the market. And what's funny is amateur traders or retail traders, and even a lot of professional traders are guilty of this as well. When a company

reports better than expected earnings or non-farm payrolls comes out slightly better or better than expected, short-term traders like retail

traders and even professional day traders, they will go into the market and they will buy stocks

or buy the market on the day of those numbers. And it's a big mistake because

Prices have already run into the number and prices already reflect the expectation.

And what these guys are actually doing is they are providing liquidity for all of us guys

who operate in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, who predicted it already 20 to 60 days previously.

And we took positions before the price is moved.

And we are now getting out

and those guys are providing us with liquidity.

They are linked to the party.

And of course, when you see this time horizon

and volatility chart on the screen,

now you better understand why we are not one day

or five day traders or one year to five year investors.

We are operating in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, trying to take advantage of one to three month

volatility and the move in prices on expectation of what's coming out in the next 20 to 60 days. And also now you better understand

why we don't or try as hard as possible not to exist in the gray area because trades slowly

become investments throughout the gray area between the 60 to 120-day time horizon.

Before 60 days, we are essentially taking trading positions.

At 120 days and beyond, they are definitely investments.

But on the journey from 60 to 120 days, a trade is very quickly becoming an investment.

And we are not investors.

We operate in the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And we are forecasting what's going to happen 20 to 60 days

from now.

And we're making sure that we take the position now.

And prices move in 20 to 60 days.

And we are getting out around or before the 60-day time horizon.

Now, as a reminder as well, our pro-trader systematic framework.

So if you recall this from earlier in the video series, we have our theory and implementation.

And of course, in a video series, we are covering,

of course, mostly theory. And the theory that we've covered so far in the PTM video series

is the quantitative process of macroeconomics. And that is in the area of fundamentals.

and that is in the area of fundamentals.

And fundamentals, as mentioned previously, at the beginning of the video series,

is the most important part of the overall

ProTrader systematic framework.

This is what drives all of your challenges.

trade ideas, the quantitative and the qualitative process. So the IPLT video series literally proved

statistically where we should be positioning ourselves as traders and portfolio managers

to maximize our opportunity set via time horizon and volatility analysis. And our conclusion from the IPLT video series

to enable us to get consistency in returns,

we need consistency in volatility

and consistency in opportunity set and therefore ideas.

And that is the one to three month time horizon.

And so far in the PTM video series, we've been focusing on the top down macroeconomic analysis of the quantitative process as part of the overall pro trader systematic process, which the PTM is designed in its entirety to teach you. So, so far, what we've done is we've

engaged in a very thorough masterclass in top-down analysis of macroeconomics. So, in the future,

we generate a long or short or neutral bias in our long-short portfolio.

Now, further in the PTM video series, we're going to combine this with bottom-up fundamentals

to generate long and short biases for the overall stock market, sectors, and individual stocks.

So, macroeconomic fundamentals, what do we use them

for? Well, we use them to obtain a global macro view on the stock market and a view on geographical

dispersion and expectations. So questions, for example, that we should always be asking ourselves all the time.

Will global stock markets rise or fall in their entirety? Will the US, for example, outperform

or underperform the rest of the world? Will Europe outperform the US and China underperform both Europe and the US?

We have to be asking ourselves these questions all the time.

And as traders and portfolio managers, we get the answers from our global macroeconomic data.

And that's why we always have to be on top of our leading indicators.

Now, what is the point of all this?

Well, professional traders understand that money flows globally change given the macroeconomic outlook, both geographically and globally.

between asset classes and within asset classes themselves.

So from a trading perspective,

when the entire stock market either rises or falls

because of macroeconomic factors,

we not only want to be in a position where we don't lose money,

we want to be in a position where we make money.

We are absolute return traders.

We want to focus on that and make money, whether the market goes up or down and not be concerned about measuring ourselves against stock market returns.

We want to make money in all environments.

returns. We want to make money in all environments. And this requires an understanding of macroeconomics and using the leading indicators to forecast the future. And as a reminder why, we want to predict

which way the wind is blowing. We want to know where the tailwind is to enable not only our portfolio bias of long, short or neutral, but also to make sure we take advantage of the moves.

So we're long the right stocks and we're short the right stocks as well.

And of course, we always want to make sure we're on top of our risk management.

So when a macroeconomic factor changes, we know what's going on, we know what it means, and we can adjust our portfolio.

So, for example, if you've been experiencing this at any time in the market in real time with real money,

in the market in real time with real money.

If you've ever been in a situation in a bull market where, for example, you are long growth stocks and the stock market falls suddenly by 10% and your growth stocks go down 20, 30 or 40%

and underperform the index move and there doesn't seem to be any reason for it.

So there's no, for example, stock-specific reasons for the moves of the underperformance.

And most retail traders often have no idea why this happens. Well, it's usually because of a change in macroeconomic expectations and professional

money managers reallocating risk. Everything seems like it's fine in this situation. And the world

seems on paper that it's in good shape. But then the market and your stocks get slammed and you take really heavy losses,

wiping out most of your previous gains or even worse, you completely blow up your trading account.

And this is why it's so important to be on top of macroeconomic factors

not just in an attempt to predict future moves in the stock market and future economic growth and earnings,

but also if there's an unexpected macroeconomic shift.

You need to be on top of it so you know what to do.

What would you do in that situation?

Well, you'd preempt it from a risk management perspective. You would shift your portfolio bias quickly, and you'd probably shift what you are actually long and what you are actually short in your portfolio.

So there would be a composition change in the portfolio and a directional change in the portfolio as well.

And this is why it's so important to be on top of these macroeconomic

numbers. The same, by the way, also happens in bear markets when you're net short. And macroeconomic

expectations shift from, say, contraction or slowdown to positive or higher than expected growth.

In that situation, also, if you're on top of your macroeconomic

numbers, you understand what's going on, you will change your portfolio bias and change the

composition of your portfolio. So in an overall pro-trader systematic process, we must always be

on top of the macroeconomic picture and outlook so we can

change our portfolio bias and potentially the composition as and when it's required to do so,

not only to protect ourselves against the unexpected, but also to make money from the moves.

but also to make money from the moves. So what we're doing is here is we're combining the macroeconomic with the microeconomic to enable trade idea generation,

which taken together with a timing appraisal, trade structuring and preemptive risk management in place enables the creation of a long short portfolio with a 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And we're using microeconomic fundamentals to obtain a micro view on stocks and sectors within the market.

Marrying the macro and the micro together gives us the edge that we need to allocate our dollars with confidence in our ideas and positions. is microeconomic fundamentals, which is all quantitative, plus microeconomic fundamentals,

which is both quantitative and qualitative.

And this is the vast majority of work

that we do as professionally trained traders

and makes up the vast majority of a pro-systematic framework.

And therefore, it makes up the vast majority of the professional trading masterclass video series.

Now, in the next section of the PTM video series,

you're going to learn the fundamentals of long-short portfolio management.

Then, we're going to move on to microeconomic

quantitative and qualitative processes that are required for trade idea

generation. Now as we are at a juncture in the PTM video series, we're obviously

leaving leading indicators now, it's very important to never forget the objective. The objective

is to provide a framework here that allows retail traders to emulate consistently profitable

professional traders so you can benefit from the same approach. In aiming to make you guys

consistently profitable, the framework must allow you to utilize the same approach taken by on a regular, weekly basis and realistically

fit this into your normal, everyday lives.

As a reminder, a systematic asset selection process, which is what we're going through

here in the PTM video series, is one in which a trader or investor goes through a series of processes

in order to find trades or investments that provide a higher probability of success when

compared to randomness.

And guys, winning at trading in financial markets is not about the small, tiny percentage chance of finding one idea that makes massive returns

through randomness.

And guys, winning at trading in financial markets

is not about the small percentage chance

of finding one idea that makes big returns

through randomness.

Winning at trading in financial markets

is generating consistency in returns

over many, many trades.

This means applying a process

that is both repeatable and robust.

What you have to do is fall in love with the process

instead of fantasizing about this crazy idea

of unicorn returns.

Consistency in returns, if you fall in love with the process, will occur.

Now, obviously generating consistency is a good idea

in returns requires implementation with real money.

And that is when a trader becomes unconsciously competent.

This is when you are on autopilot

and at the professional level.

And if you remember our four steps of learning

applied to trading, so the competency hierarchy. You've now come out of unconscious

incompetence. Why? Because you're doing the PTM video series. You are now at the level of conscious

incompetence, where you can see literally throughout the video series that you now have

the right information to enable learning and application. Competence comes later when

you're actually implementing and then targeting consistent returns. And not only just simply

targeting consistent returns, but actually getting them. And that's when you get into the level of unconscious competence.

So we obviously have a lot of information still to get through in the PTM video series.

We've covered a lot of information and we've covered only leading indicators so far.

And if you think of what we've learned so far from leading indicators and understand it in the context of our ITPM principles, if you remember the self-starter mentality, what are we going to be doing on a regular basis?

parts, firstly, throughout history, and we're going to become students of business cycle history.

On a continuous basis, we're going to be utilizing leading indicators in conjunction with each other to get a picture of the economy for portfolio direction. Our data collection and investigation,

Our data collection and investigation, so learning about money markets and surveys and how they work in detail to get an appreciation of what the numbers mean is very, very important.

Why?

Because when you analyze the data, you will have an edge over those who actually have no idea. So we're talking about here, the unconsciously incompetent. You can then predict

the future and get positioned for the future when others can't or don't. That's where your edge

comes in. Now, obviously, interpretation of the numbers is way more important than just knowing what the number is.

There's no point in sitting here on a regular basis

and just looking at the numbers coming out

in money markets and surveys,

not interpreting the numbers,

going through the data and figuring out what it all means

and how it fits in to the big picture context.

If you just look at the numbers and do no further work,

you're not going to understand it,

you're not going to interpret it,

and you're not going to act on it.

So we have to be self-starters.

We have to be self-sustainable.

We have to have a solid work ethic. We have to glean as

much information as possible from our free resources. And we have to work smart, not hard.

So being self-sustainable, do your own work, generate your own ideas, no copy trading.

generate your own ideas, no copy trading. With work ethic, put your passion to one side.

On a regular basis, you have to work, be conscientious and regularly implement the processes. From our free resources, you can see so far in the video series, and it will occur

throughout the video series. Everything you have seen is

literally free information, but interpretation of the information is the key. So you act on it

with confidence. And of course, work smart, not hard. Focus on what matters. Eliminate the 97% of BS and noise, process efficiently, and just make money. You are now

moving up the competency hierarchy, and there's still a lot more work to do.

So now, guys, we're going to move on to a very technical part of the video series. We're going

to be covering foundations of portfolio management.

So let's go over to the next video and get started.