Okay, guys, so welcome back to the screen.

Welcome to video number 32, one of the most important videos of the entire PTM video series.

Why? Because we're now going to look at catalysts. And what you have to remember all the time, guys, throughout this video and in the future is that catalysts are the difference between what constitutes an investment idea and what constitutes a trade idea. So although we are only dedicating one video in the entire video series towards identifying catalysts

and the discipline of being able to actually identify catalysts in your trade idea generation process, it is absolutely crucial to what distinguishes the difference

between an investment idea and an actual trade idea. And therefore, on top of that, the difference

between what classifies you as a trader and what classifies somebody else as an investor.

Now before we get into the processing skills of how you actually go about identifying catalysts,

we're going to need to set the stage here and we're going to have to get all of the

background information in place so you fully understand how catalysts actually fit in to the

bigger picture. And additionally, you're going to have to learn what actually constitutes a catalyst.

There's a big difference between what a catalyst actually is and meaningless information that

isn't actually going to move a stock. And a lot of that comes down to discretion and experience.

So here on the screen now, we have our familiar pro-trader systematic process

for long-short portfolio management within the 20 to 60-day time horizon.

By this stage, this process and the steps throughout the process

should be imprinted in your mind.

But we do need further clarification at this stage

as to how catalysts, stock catalysts,

actually fit in to the entire process.

So we have our two major stages of theory, our groundwork, our research,

and then we have our actual implementation when we're going into the market with real

money to take a position. So in theory, in our research, in our work,

that we're doing to identify potential long and short ideas.

We have our quantitative process, which is split up into macro and micro,

and we have our qualitative process, which we've just started to go through

in the last couple of videos.

So through our quantitative process, and quality creative process we are fully focused and this is 80 information idea generation

then we actually have to think is down to technical analysis and price action indicators

which we will be coming on to later in the video series.

But at this stage, when you're from the final stage,

the trade is actually a green light as long as there are catalysts in place.

Without catalysts, what we essentially have is an investment idea.

So if everything stacks up fundamentally and we've identified a positive or negative outlier

and we actually want to take a fundamental position in this stock.

So either a long or a short position.

What we essentially have at this stage is an investment idea, not a trade idea.

When we do our fundamental work, yes, we can have our best practices when it comes to volatility, market cap filters, etc.

We're going to be located in areas of the market with our long ideas and our short ideas that are fundamentally driven.

We're going to be located in the market which suits our time horizon.

However, if we have no foreseeable catalysts within our 20 to 60-day time horizon,

then we are relying on unknown factors to get a return within the time horizon.

us to get a return within the time horizon. So we need to go through with every trade idea our fundamental processes to identify positive and negative outliers, and then we must identify

catalysts that are going to drive the stock within the 20 to 60 day time horizon in the direction that we forecast.

This is what's going to get the stock moving within the time horizon.

And the discipline that we must engage in on repeat over many years.

many trades over a long period of time because that is what's going to get us our outsized absolute returns.

And yes, visually, when you look at the process here, boxed out as theory and implementation,

so our research and then our real money, real-world implementation,

money, real-world implementation. When you look at this in sequence, we have fundamentals,

then timing, and then trade structure and risk management. However, what is the point in attempting to time a trade with technicals and price action indicators if we actually can't identify any catalysts that will drive the stock

within our 20 to 60 day time horizon? Well, the answer is simple. There is no point in doing that

work. It will be wasted time and energy. So for sake of work efficiency and optimization, we jump from fundamentals to

catalyst identification, then we look at timing and trade structure afterwards. So this is why

identification of catalysts is so crucial to our overall trade idea generation process. You must never ever forget that a trade idea is not complete

until you've actually identified catalysts

and then done further work on timing and trade structure.

So never forget that a trade idea is not an investment idea,

nor is it actually a day trade. Remember, we sit in the 20 to 60 day

time horizon and we are utilizing fundamentals in order to generate a bias. So a directional bias,

whether that's long or short in identifying positive and negative outliers.

What we're essentially doing is we are identifying stocks, long or short, that we have a directional

bias in.

However, at the fundamental stage, we haven't placed a time limit on our trades. We've just engaged in some best practices where we've had market cap filters

and we are leaning towards areas of the market where we know we get the volatility.

Of course, that's going to increase our chances versus not doing that.

But what's going to increase our chances way more in getting

outsized absolute returns within the 20 to 60 day time horizon is identification of catalysts

within our time horizon. So we're placing a time limit on our trades.

We are operating in the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And by identification of catalysts, we are turning a fundamental bias, an investment idea into a trade idea.

So let's have a full rundown of the whole process here and what it really means in detail.

So what actually is a trade idea? Let's define it.

So we're using in our process the best disciplines of investing, but we are also using the best

disciplines of trading. So if you recall back to the entire first part of the PTM video series, what were we trying to achieve there? We were trying to achieve a portfolio bias. What is this discipline? It's a discipline engaged in by both traders and investors. It is fundamental identification of the macroeconomic tailwind.

Where are we actually located across all asset classes?

Well, we are located in the stock market.

We focus on equities because that's where the most volatility is and where we can get outsized returns consistently is an asset by both traders and investors.

What is the type of volatility that we want to expose ourselves to as traders? Well, ideally, what we're looking for is around 20% annualized portfolio volatility or slightly greater,

which means we are looking at 1.5 times to 2 times the level of the long-term average of the volatility index,

the S&P 500 volatility index, the VIX.

And we also want low correlation in the

portfolio. And this discipline is not necessarily an investor discipline unless you're located in

corners of the market, like being a small cap only investor. It is much more a discipline or a practice engaged in by

traders. Now what is our strategy as traders to exploit this volatility? Well, we are

long-short portfolio managers within a 20 to 60-day time horizon. Investors are

long-only, therefore this by default is a trading discipline.

Next up, fundamentals.

So, the identification of stocks utilizing fundamental supporting evidence that

both forward-looking and backwards-looking, to enable somebody to take a position with real money.

And that someone is utilizing both quantitative and qualitative processes.

This is a practice that is engaged in primarily by investors. Why? Because if we just look at fundamentals with no time

horizon limit, this is an investment practice. So yes, as traders, portfolio managers, long short

portfolio managers, we do engage in the fundamental processes to identify potential investment ideas.

But what separates us as traders versus investors is that we have a shorter time horizon.

We must have catalysts that occur within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

that occur within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

So the positions that we take are actually defined as trades, not investments,

and they don't turn into investments in our trading account with no time horizon limit on them. So for our next two steps to turn what we would define as an investment

idea that is a potential trade idea, turning that into a trade idea, we must identify catalysts

within our 20 to 60 day time horizon that will enable us to gauge entry and exit prices and therefore a return.

So that would be our timing on the actual trade.

And it will actually lead us in our going to be long or short stock position or an options position for optimizing return on investment.

replicate a long or short stock position, utilizing option structures. This, by default, is preventative risk management,

which brings us on to our next stage as traders,

our risk management processes.

So our PRM, preventative risk management, self-imposed rules.

And our reactive risk management processes where we act on winners or losers

we have live positions.

But as children,

traders, the way we set our preventative risk management and our reactive risk management

is very different to investors. And then when we actually exit positions, we have hard-coded data

that we refer to as trader statistics. And this is very different in the way that traders measure

their performance versus investors.

What we're actually doing is measuring the effectiveness of a trader,

which is different to measuring the effectiveness of an investor.

Now, don't worry about the risk management and trader stats parts for the moment,

as in the details.

We're going to be looking at that later in the video series

at this stage it's just very very important and is the message we're trying

this stays in to the overall process.

Generating a trade idea does not mean stopping at the fundamental stage

and conveniently choosing to ignore what our time horizon actually is.

So when you look at this list of steps and how they are defined in terms of whether it is a

utilized step, a utilized process by either traders or investors, just simply look at the line where we

have fundamentals. So the fifth line down, the fundamentals and the fundamental processes that are primarily used by investors,

but also utilized by traders.

And then look below it.

You'll see catalysts, which feed timing and structuring,

and you'll see risk management and trader statistics.

And in each descriptor, you'll see that timing structuring risk

management and trader stats this is what separates traders from investors and

also where we place ourselves in the market for consistent opportunities within the time horizon that optimizes those opportunities.

So that would be specifically our volatility, the volatility that we choose to expose ourselves to,

and the strategy to get the most out of that volatility on a risk-adjusted basis.

risk adjusted basis. So the processes that we engage in as traders that distinguish us from investors is volatility, strategy, timing, structuring, which are driven by catalysts, risk management and trader statistics.

One of the worst traps you can fall into as a retail trader is by engaging in practices that lead you to becoming an investor and not an actual trader.

trading process become an investor process.

And we must never ever let a trade that we are exposed to, a trade that we're putting on, become an investment.

So understanding this now, guys, is very important because in this part of the video, we're going to ask management trader statistics.

And catalysts, even though it's one video in the entire video series, it's very important because catalysts drive our timing and structuring.

So always try to remember the overall pro-trader systematic process.

Always remember our time horizon, our volatility and strategy as traders and understand what the difference is between a trader and an investor and understand the difference

between a trade idea and an investment idea and engage in the best practices for traders,

which is timing and structuring, which are driven by catalysts and risk management and

trader statistics that are for traders, not for investors.

and trader statistics that are for traders, not for investors.

Now, while we are engaging here in an overall big picture of the differences between traders and investors and also a trade idea and an investment idea, it's worth revisiting the

quality of trade ideas.

If you recall this slide from earlier in the video series, we determined that if

your black box variability, so your ability to risk manage it, is actually very, very good and it's

fixed. So remember, these are mechanical processes of preventative risk management and reactive risk management, which can be

competently learned over quite a short space of time. If we assume that those parameters are fixed,

then what determines our variable profit and loss over time? Well, it can only be the quality of our trade ideas. And when we think of catalysts

in this context, now you're probably beginning to understand that the quality of our actual

trade ideas, so remember the definition of a trade

idea has to also include catalysts, now you should be beginning to understand that the

quality of our trade ideas has to also include catalysts included. So imagine if you just continuously

fill your portfolio with longs and shorts

that don't actually move within the 20 to

60 day time horizon. What would actually happen?

Well, you would just end up trading out of your positions at around 30, 40, 50, 60 days,

and then replace them with more positions that don't make a 20 to 60-day time horizon.

And last management, your black box variability will have to go into overdrive and you would just spend your

life managing the risk on positions that don't actually move very much. So you are less likely to have a favorable

profit outcome. And what may even happen over time is you may fall foul to the worst habit of all, which is allowing your trading

positions to actually turn into investments. So now you're not actually running a trading account,

you're running an investment account, which is obviously totally different.

which is obviously totally different.

So yes, the quality of your ideas really matters.

But what really matters when we think of it in the context of catalysts is the quality of your trade ideas is what really matters.

And what separates a trade idea from an investment idea is catalysts.

So when we're going through our bottom-up analysis,

what do we have to do here?

Well, we obviously identify our outliers

through our quantitative process.

That is the discovery and evidence phase.

Then we learn about the stock information,

which by default is a qualitative process,

and we will probably end up discovering

through identifying our outliers anyway.

This is actually evidence collection.

Next, we have our qualitative process

of identifying KPIs and all of the qualitative processes in addition that we went through in recent previous videos.

And this is that these are the first drivers behind revenue and earnings that we look at.

These are key performance indicators that measure business effectiveness.

This is what's driving revenue and earnings.

This is how we get our microeconomic tailwind through identification of KPIs.

This is what's going to move the needle of revenue and earnings in the future.

So this is how we predict the future

from both an investor's and trader's perspective.

So in the qualitative phase, in our qualitative processes,

what sets us apart as traders from investors

is the identification of catalysts. And this is our second driver.

So KPIs and the identification of KPIs as part of the qualitative process, our first driver,

KPIs drive revenue and earnings of the company. Catalysts drive the stock price.

So catalysts are our second driver in the qualitative process

and what sets us apart as traders from investors.

And as mentioned previously, catalysts essentially is what's going to get you paid. It's the difference between getting large absolute return

over many trades over a long period of time and not.

So when we think of the evolution of our quantity

and quality to generate a trade idea,

where do catalysts actually fit in? Well, we have our first stage, our quant discovery, the tools

of forward-looking valuation outliers. This is our discovery phase, our quant discovery phase. Then within

our quantitative phase, we are processing for quantitative evidence by utilizing backwards

looking financial statements. And this gives us our numerical tailwind. Then we are looking to our qualitative assessment and our

qualitative drivers in the first stage, where we're looking beneath the hood, where we are turning to

backwards and forwards looking key performance indicators and inferring a management operating plan.

And it's the KPIs that are going to be driving revenue and earnings going forward.

But our final fundamental step is what sets us apart as traders.

This is what's going to give us a chance.

get us paid in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, which is our second and final stage in the

qualitative process. We are identifying catalysts that are going to move within our time horizon.

So I mentioned previously that we never want to fall into the trap of turning a trade idea or even worse a trade position that's

live into an investment. If we think of this actually in the reverse, what do we want as

traders from our process in order to generate trade ideas? Well, we want to turn an investment into a trade and specifically turning

a pretty solid investment idea, whether that's a long idea or even a short idea, into an actual

trade idea that's going to move and pay outsized returns within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

We want to get paid within that time horizon.

And how do we do that?

We do that by identifying meaningful catalysts.

And there's a great saying in the industry that differentiates traders from investors because traders want to get paid within a shorter time horizon than investors,

but we are utilizing fundamental processes.

And this phrase sums it all up because we want to get paid within the time horizon.

The acronym is F-U-P-M. F-U-P-M. Have a guess what it stands for.

Well, without using the curse word at the front, it stands for F-U-Pay-Me. And where it would be

used in a couple of scenarios in professional trading circles. Firstly, it would be used in a couple of scenarios in professional trading circles.

Firstly, it would be used typically if somebody came to you with what would constitute an investment idea,

and you're asking them, when is the stock actually going to move?

We don't want to hear from somebody who thinks they're coming to us with what we define as a trade

idea, and they're coming to us with what they think is a trade idea, but it's actually an

investment idea. So yes, they may have done some fundamental work. They may have identified

a fundamental positive or negative outlier in a sector.

And yes, over the long term, they may have identified a potential good long investment or even a good short disinvestment.

But what they fail to do is identify

identify catalysts that are going to make the stock move within the 20 to 60 day time horizon,

which means within our large opportunity set in the stock market, our capital would be better

allocated somewhere else, i.e. into an actual trade idea that's going to move within the 20 to 60 day time horizon in a meaningful

way. So the natural response from a trader to that person coming to them with

what they think is a trade idea but it's actually an investment idea would be to

ask them the obvious question, when is the stock going to move? Yes, the person may have done their fundamental work

and identified a positive or negative outlier in a sector. That doesn't mean it's a trade.

That is the easy part, guys. The easy part is doing the mechanical quantitative processing and identifying a potential fundamental long or fundamental short.

What's not so easy is completing the trade idea generation process

by identifying catalysts, timing the trade well, and structuring it well

to enable outsized returns because the stock or stocks over many trade ideas are moving

meaningfully within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

So as a trader, the response to somebody who's only done the fundamental work and has generated

an investment idea is going to be the question, when is it going to move? F you pay me. I want to get

paid from an idea, a trade idea, within 60 days. If I can't, it's not a trade idea. So I'm going to

allocate my capital somewhere else into a trade idea that's actually going to move within the next 20 to 60 days.

Otherwise, my capital is dead over the next 20 to 60 days.

So what's the point?

Now, as mentioned, this phrase, F-U-P-M, F-U-P-A-Y-Me,

it's not just used in professional trading circles to

distinguish between what a trade idea is and what an investment idea is it's also

used typically on trading floors in hedge funds and investment banks around

the time of the year where traders and portfolio managers are expecting their bonuses.

So everyone will have an expected number that they think they're going to get paid,

and there will be some sort of range of expectation around that,

a low end, a high end, and a mean expectation.

of what people expect to get paid in their bonus.

And the low end would typically be a level

at which the person would feel genuinely insulted by the number.

This is the level where if you walk into the office,

into the meeting, your bonus meeting,

that if the company that you work for

tells you that you're going to get paid below that level,

then your response is going to be to your boss, F you, pay me.

And although these levels and this acronym obviously has serious implications

and consequences on people's pay and headcount,

it is actually used in jest amongst traders and portfolio managers

a lot between each other during the bonus period of the year.

But it's a great example of the mentality of traders and portfolio managers.

We're not in the financial markets

to accept the low end of being paid

or even worse, below that.

We have an expectation

and that's what we're targeting.

Our expectation and what we are targeting

is outsized, absolute return financial markets

and we expect to get paid and for us to do that we require the trading discipline of identifying catalysts which in turn generates trade ideas and not investment ideas. So if you come to me, for example, with a solid investment idea, and it's not a trade idea, of course, from a trader's perspective, I'm going to ask you, when is the stock going to move? And if you can't answer it, my response is going to be, F you, pay me.

my response is going to be F you, pay me.

And your response should be exactly the same to anybody who comes to you with an investment idea.

Why? Because you're supposed to be a trader, not an investor.

And I think this acronym and this phrase and where it fits in to our entire process is actually very, very important.

fits in to our entire process is actually very, very important because when you're going through your processes now, generating trade ideas, going forward, you are going to remember this example

forever. And you should have this phrase, F you pay me, etched in your memory. So now we understand fully where catalysts fit in to the whole process.

What does a catalyst actually look like?

So how we actually define a catalyst as traders is,

is any stock or sector news or event that actually moves the needle on KPIs and the quantitative numbers.

So revenue, earnings, and forward valuation.

So this is something that is moving the needle on the operation, on the business itself.

Either that or it could be technical.

So any technical news or event that affects the stock itself.

So any technical news or event that may move the stock in the immediate future.

On top of that, it could be something. So the catalyst could

be something that doesn't affect the business, the operation, or the stock, or it's coming from the

stock itself. It could be something coming from the macroeconomic space. So any macroeconomic news or event that may move the stock in the immediate future outside

of the company's control.

So it could be something that's affecting the entire market and the economy, and therefore

it's a catalyst that actually moves the

stock. And really a catalyst that's going to move the stock price in a

meaningful way is going to be news flow or timely information that is not already disseminated

by the market. So it's not already in the price.

If it is already expected by the market, disseminated by the market, we define this as traders, as old news.

So a real catalyst is something that moves the needle on KPIs, so it's operational, or it's technical or macroeconomic, but it must be not priced in to the stock.

It must be incremental new news flow that is going to move the stock in a meaningful way.

move the stock in a meaningful way. So the way to think about catalysts is to split them up into three main areas. We have news flow that is stock and sector specific. So this is idiosyncratic to the stock itself and the sector that the stock is in. Or it affects all stocks in the sector. Or we have technical catalysts which is idiosyncratic,

affecting only the company itself.

And then we have market or economy catalysts

which can be defined as a macroeconomic shift that affects all stocks in the market.

So let's have a look here at a non-exhaustive list of some examples of stock and sector-specific catalysts that are operational.

operational. So we have quarterly and annual earnings announcements and changes to forward guidance for the company and of its competitors. So forward guidance for revenue and earnings metrics.

We can have product or service launches for the company and launches of product and services

from competitors. We can have changes in key performance indicator expectations for the company itself and or competitors.

We can have meaningful changes in credit spreads for the company itself

and or credit spreads of their competitors across the sector.

We can have credit upgrades or downgrades from ratings agencies.

We can have stock upgrades or downgrades from equities analysts. So these are our research

analysts that we've looked at previously in the qualitative section. So they're upgrading

or downgrading equities based on revenue and earnings estimates.

We can have equity research analysts changing their price targets,

their stock price targets, based on a shift in expectations.

We can have legal and regulatory changes that are specific to the sector and the stock and affect both the stock and the sector and all the companies

in the sector and their operations.

We can have ISM manufacturing or ISM services data, changes in that that lead to changes

in sector and stock expectations.

We can have supply-side disruptions in a sector or specific to a stock

where we get changes to the supply chain. And meaningful changes would be unexpected changes.

We can have changes in inventories for the company itself or for a sector. Of course,

we want to see in inventories unexpected changes. This

can be a catalyst too. We can have rapid unexpected changes in commodities prices that are affecting

inventories that are specific to a particular sector and the stock itself.

And we can have currency moves that are affecting the revenue and earnings

of the company itself if they're not engaging

in any currency hedging activities.

There is generally

an endless amount of stock and sector-specific catalysts that can potentially affect a stock in the future.

This is a non-exhaustive list, guys, and of course, you can add anything you want in here.

But these are categories that you will find will apply to operational catalysts across multiple sectors.

What about technical factors that affect sectors and specifically stocks as well?

Well, technical factors, it will be things like an announcement of a stock buyback

or a stock split or a rights issue or a dividend increase or dividend being cut.

It would also include announcements of acquisitions, company restructurings,

so changes to the capital structure and any type of M&A deals that the company is engaging in

or a company's competitor,

so other stocks within the sector.

Other technical factors that can affect a stock can be index or market inclusions

or omission from indexes.

So, for example, a stock going into the S&P 500 or out of the S&P 500 or perhaps being included in the Russell 2000 or omitted from the Russell 2000.

Being included in indexes would mean that stocks are exposed to passive inflows.

inflows and being excluded from indexes would mean the stock would no longer be a beneficiary of passive inflows for funds that track the performance of the index. In a similar vein,

ETF inclusions and emissions can occur as well. Inclusions for ETFs would mean that the stock becomes a beneficiary of the inflows

to that ETF and vice versa for emissions. Another technical factor perhaps would be if the short

interest in a stock gets very high and the lenders of that stock to the shorts decide they want their stock back. So they call

in the short and we get a big short squeeze in the stock. That's a technical situation.

And of course, this can move a stock in a meaningful way as well. So all of these are

potential technical catalysts that are both stock and sector specific.

And again, this is a non-exhaustive list, guys.

Concentrate on the process.

You can add anything you want in here as a category.

Just make sure you go through the process and you actually look

listed in the correct subheading of operational or technical. What about for the market or economy?

Well, this is a fairly straightforward situation for us. We should know the definition of potential

future catalysts that affect the market or the economy by now. So rapid changes in commodities

prices and inventories that are affecting the overall stock market,

interest rate decisions by the FOMC and FOMC minutes, changes in bias and language,

rising or falling market rates, so nominal and real rates,

changes in consumer sentiment, changes in headline inflation expectations,

changes in consumer sentiment, changes in headline inflation expectations,

changes in employment expectations,

and potentially currency moves that are affecting the overall stock market.

Again, this is a non-exhaustive list, guys.

Just make sure you go through the processes properly and categorize all of the catalysts that you could see potentially coming up in all areas.

And just always remember the key here to catalysts is that it's not old news.

It's new news to the market that changes the needle, that moves the needle and is not in the price.

It's unexpected by the market. And the catalyst

incrementally brings in new money for a potential long idea or brings out new

sellers for a potential short idea. So as traders, what are we really interested in

when it comes to catalysts?

Well, due to the fact that we are mostly selecting outliers,

what we're really interested in is the identification of stock and sector-specific catalysts that are both operational and technical. If something affects the entire market, our positive outliers, so our longs,

should outperform, and our negative outliers, our shorts, should underperform.

If we have something, a catalyst, that affects the stock or the sector specifically, we need to know about it and we need to know how our stock

is going to react to it. What we also need to know, crucially, is if the stock that we're looking at,

does it actually have frequent catalysts? If we're looking at a stock, if we're pondering over a long or short idea, if the stock has no evidence of past catalysts, what makes us think there's going to be catalysts in the future?

Now, something we have to also do is use...

a bit of common sense here about publicly known catalysts. So quarterly earnings reports,

they are a known catalyst. Everyone knows the earnings date and everyone knows the consensus

estimates and range. As traders, what we are really interested in is catalysts that are in between earnings reports

that may shift expectations.

So the consensus estimates and therefore the stock price in a meaningful way leading into earnings reports.

By the time a company reports its quarterly earnings, the price may have already moved because expectations have shifted based on other news already. So the stock has already what we call traveled and arrived and it has priced in the quarterly earnings numbers already.

Now, going back to this point about stocks showing evidence in the past

of actually having frequent catalysts,

and if a stock actually has no evidence of past catalysts,

why we would even think there would be catalysts in the future.

As traders, we want to see evidence that there's potentially going to be a lot of catalysts from a

stock, and we can do work around the stock to figure this out. In financial markets and in

professional trading circles, stocks that we identify as stocks that have typically no catalysts in between quarterly earnings reports, we call them tumbleweed stocks.

when a couple of gunslingers come out into the town and everyone runs away into their homes

because they know a battle, a gunslinging fight is about to occur.

The town is quiet.

Nothing is happening in the town

except two gunslingers about to have it out.

And a tumbleweed rolls across the road.

Well, it's a great metaphor when you think about it

because one of these guys can be you

and the other guy can be someone on the other side of your trade.

So you can be going into a stock that has no evidence of catalysts

in between quarterly earnings reports and you can go long.

And there's a guy on the other side going short

but both of you are

sitting in a town where nothing

goes on. It's tumbleweed

town. And what ends

up happening? Well,

nothing. It's so boring

the gunslingers just have

a standoff and they end up killing each other. And that's the only thing that happens in our 20 to

60 day time horizon. These are the situations that we want to stay away from in the market as traders

because we need catalysts in the 20 to 60 day time horizon that are going to move the stock

in a meaningful way. Whether we're going long or short, it doesn't matter.

So when we're looking at a stock for a potential long or short,

we do work around past information to figure out if the stock is a tumbleweed stock or not.

So what we do is we assess management's ability to communicate. How good is management

at management communication? So when it comes to the earnings day itself, quarterly earnings day,

the communication from management on that earnings day comes via the earnings call and is also written via the earnings call transcript.

When management is communicating in between earnings reports,

the communication from management comes from the investor relations department.

So a highly communicative management team in between earnings reports is a good thing for long trade ideas and it's potentially bad for short ideas.

Why potentially? Because the management could be highly communicative in telling the market how bad things actually are.

So this would actually be great for shorts.

However, when fundamentals are changing for the negative

and management is not communicating, so they go and hide in a cave and go quiet,

this is also great for shorts and it's bad for longs.

However, generally speaking, if we do identify a management that is not very communicative

in between earnings reports, it generally means that there's likely to be no catalysts

in between earnings reports to create volatility.

For long ideas, it's also not a good sign because the company is basically only doing

the regulatory bare minimum. So they're providing only quarterly updates on earnings day.

Ideally, for long ideas, what we want to see is we want to see management making lots of positive incremental noise in between earnings reports.

So what you're going to do is we want to see management making lots of positive incremental noise in between earnings reports.

you have to remember is that all public companies are regulated and they're regulated to provide

the market with updates of any specific news or catalyst that may materially affect future earnings.

So if we look at a company in the past and we realize that they have very thin news flow or catalysts,

it means that nothing materially affects the business or the stock in between earnings reports.

So we don't see evidence of good or bad news.

It's basically boring.

It's a tumbleweed stock.

As traders, we're probably going to end up here in this situation as a gunslinger in tumbleweed town.

We're going to be sitting around for months with a position just waiting for earnings day.

a position just waiting for earnings day. Ideally, we want stocks to have meaningful catalysts in between earnings reports. Now, when we're seeking to identify whether a stock

is a tumbleweed stock or not, we have a process to identify catalysts and the frequency of catalysts in total and meaningful catalysts.

Of course, across different stocks, things will change in small ways, but overall, there

is a process that we can apply.

So you can use this example as a template in pretty much all situations.

So firstly, what we do is we go to the Investor Relations Department website of a particular company or stock,

and we take the number of press releases that the company has put out in the last one year, two years, three or four years,

and we put them in a spreadsheet with the

date and the headline. We then work out a total for all press releases, the annual average and the

monthly average of all press releases, and we can also do this on a quarterly basis too. We can also do a very quick superficial optical exercise where we

transpose weekly and daily stock charts for the periods and we correlate the daily and weekly

moves on the chart to which releases actually move the stock the most and by how much.

What we also want to do is we want to

look at all the press releases that the company has put out and then we want to

identify press releases that are additional to press releases that are put out specifically for

earnings. So we want to work out which press releases additional to earnings were price

sensitive and why they were price sensitive. So we can begin attempting to understand whether a stock

is a tumbleweed stock or not. We ask ourselves this question, does the stock not typically have catalysts in between earnings or do they actually

have catalysts in between earnings? Is it a tumbleweed stock or not? Additionally, we want to be looking

at events and presentations that the company puts on, so events, and the presentations associated with those events that the company

puts out. So we add in events and presentations into our analysis, which is going to include

earnings, of course, because that is an event and there's presentations that go along with that event,

and we have upcoming earnings dates for competitors. And we also look at the weekly and daily charts for the period for this as well.

And we correlate to which earnings releases moved the stock and by how much.

By going through this exercise, we also understand what catalysts are meaningful to the stock by default. So we can start to work out

what catalysts have potential that are upcoming, that are going to move the stock within our 20 to 60 day time horizon.

So the process that we go through here, we're actually engaging in a process so that we know what we're dealing with,

so we can actually structure our trades accordingly around the catalyst themselves.

Now, what we're going to do here is go through an example, and the example that we're going to go through is JetBlue, J-B-L-U, the stock JetBlue.

is JetBlue, J-B-L-U, the stock JetBlue.

And here we have a screenshot of their investor relations page on their website.

And you can see very clearly on the left-hand side,

the two areas that we're interested in when we're looking to identify catalysts and the processes that we're going to go through.

We have press releases and we have events and

presentations. We also have a download in the downloads area that accompanies this

video called the press releases template. You can use this spreadsheet or

template and apply it to any situation when you're processing to identify catalysts for a particular stock.

Now, just as a side note, this can actually be a very cumbersome and manual process.

However, when you get good at this, it will be

a quicker situation for you. But if over time you can't commit the effort and energy to this

in your normal working week, the good news is it's very straightforward, but it is quite

cumbersome. You can actually outsource these processes to any outsourcing sites like Freelancer,

processes to any outsourcing sites like Freelancer, Fiverr, Upwork, or just any outsourcing site that's in vogue in the current day. Of course, you can do it by yourself, DIY, but it can be

outsourced at very low prices. My advice here would be to learn how to do it yourself.

My advice here would be to learn how to do it yourself.

And when you're making meaningful money out of all of the ITPM process, the trade idea generation process,

then you can spend a tiny amount of money once you're making money on outsourcing some of the cumbersome and manual processes.

This is up to you to decide which processes you insource or outsource.

It's all down to your personal situation.

So please don't send messages through the Institute website

asking whether you should outsource this particular process

or that particular process.

Just use common sense, please.

It's down to you.

Stick to the principle, though,

that you actually learn how to do everything yourself first.

Do it yourself first.

And then stick to the principle of making money,

making significant money,

before you start spending it on outsourcing.

And of course, you're running a business here. It's a trading account. This is your business. If you're going to reinvest some of your profits into outsourcing, it should be a tiny

amount, not a large amount. So with that in mind, if you actually go and do this yourself,

or you even outsource it, what is the actual process here?

Well, as I mentioned earlier, the first thing you do, you go to the Investor Relations website

and you download all press releases into a spreadsheet, sorted by date,

and you get a total number for press releases for a meaningful period.

And you get the totals for each year.

So add up the totals for each year and then get the total for the entire period.

So in the example, you'll see in the download section,

we've added it up for just over four years of press releases so there's five

data points and we get to a total of 343 press releases over the entire period

and of course

When we put all of this data into a spreadsheet, we want the corresponding titles of each press release.

The next thing we do is we split them out, and we split the press releases into earnings-related and non-earnings-related press releases.

So this obviously requires a bit of discretion, but you just have to go through this step so we can split them out into earnings-related and non-earnings-related.

But in most cases, it's pretty easy because as you can see on the screen here, when we look at the JetBlue press releases, it's very easy to locate anything that's related to quarterly earnings.

If you just look at the titles, it's very easy to do that. And the next step, once we've done that, once we split them out, we work out the averages for both. And at this stage, it's worth noting in the example at the bottom of the spreadsheet file, you'll see multiple spreadsheets with corresponding titles, which helps you organize the information.

which we'll come on to later. That's aggregate tables. We have press releases. That's the total press releases. We have press releases that are related to earnings, press releases that are non-earnings

related. And we also have events and presentations. So we have a total for events and presentations.

And we have events and presentations that are earnings related and events and presentations, and we have events and presentations that are earnings-related and

events and presentations that are non-earnings-related. And on that note, this is actually our next

step. So on the Investor Relations website, wherever the company in the particular situation

that you're looking at archives their events and presentations, that's where you go. So you get events and presentations

and you get a total over the same period. So we go through the same process with events and

presentations as we did with press releases and we split them out into earnings-related events

and presentations and non-earnings-related events and presentations.

And we get the totals and then we work out the averages.

And we end up with a populated, aggregated table

when you get all of your formulas right.

So we have a nice and simple visual display,

So we have a nice and simple visual display, pictorial display, to get a handle on frequency of management communication.

So we can see here when we look at press releases for JetBlue, so the top left screen.

box. We have press releases total 343 over the period. If we then navigate our eyesight over to

the left-hand side, when we look at the actual time period that we're looking at, we're looking at a

total of 51 months of press releases, which is equivalent to 17 quarters and four and a quarter years. So just over four years of

press releases. We work out our per year average which comes in at 80, our per

quarter average which is 20 press releases per quarter and our per month

average which is just under seven on average per month. Then as you can see

we've split them out

into press releases that are earnings related

and press releases that are non-earnings related.

And then on the right hand side,

we've repeated the process for events and presentations.

And in the middle, to split out press releases

and events and presentations,

we are looking at total press releases by the year,

which when you're going through your processes

is just a good reconciliation exercise

because when you split them out by year,

the total should come to the number

that's in the total number for press releases

in the first box on the left hand side.

So our two major steps that we're going through here in the process

is to get the total for press releases over a meaningful period.

Obviously it will change stock by stock, so just use common sense.

And then we get the totals for each year.

Then we work out the averages to get a frequency.

Then we split into press releases and events and presentations that are earnings-related

and non-earnings-related.

And then we gather the information for our aggregate tables, and we begin to disseminate the frequency of management communication.

And what we're really interested in here is how communicative management is in between earnings reports.

So, non-earnings-related press releases and non-earnings-related events and presentations.

releases and non earnings related events and presentations. So for our example here JetBlue, on average over the last four years JetBlue has made around six

press releases that are non earnings related per month and they hold an event

or release a presentation that are non-earnings related on average every two months. So this is quite promising for our 20 to 60 day time horizon. Management are quite clearly incrementally communicative to the market above

and beyond just simple quarterly earnings reports.

Now, once we've been through this step, what we need to do now

is work out the price-sensitive press releases

and events and presentations. So the first

part here is quite mechanical and cumbersome,

but the second part does require discretion and

experience and common sense.

Because we actually have to interpret data and interpret both non-earnings related press releases

and non-earnings related events and presentations and their impact on the stock price historically.

Now we can do this one of two ways or we can do this in both ways.

We can do it the very simple way, which is optically.

We can do it by looking at the chart for the biggest moves,

or we can do it statistically by conducting a distribution of returns analysis

in the same way that we did in the IPLT video series

and the distribution of returns analysis for money supply earlier in the PTM video series.

So we perform a distribution of returns analysis on the stock price data, and we look for above

one standard deviation moves, so outside the bounds of normality, abnormal moves, and even two standard deviation moves.

And we ask ourselves the question, which non-earnings-related press releases and non-earnings-related events and presentations actually move the stock either positively or negatively?

move the stock either positively or negatively.

So if you were doing this the very quick and dirty way, you would pull up a stock price chart,

whether that's weekly data or daily data, that's up to you.

Starting with weekly is probably a good idea and drilling into daily later. But starting with weekly, you're able to get an appreciation for the big moves upwards and the big moves downwards on a weekly basis by just optically looking at the weekly candles.

And you would just go through a visual process of looking for the big weekly candles up and down of JetBlue.

And you can see, for example, in February 2021, there's four weeks in a row that JetBlue went up a

lot when we're looking at the weekly candles. So there's an aggressive move up. Something like that

may pique our interest into having a look at what may have moved the stock price then,

and whether this was an earnings-related or non-earnings-related catalyst.

And of course, you would look further into the past as well,

and look at big weekly moves up and down and try to correlate them with the earnings-related

and non-earnings-related press releases and events and presentations.

So a pretty mechanical process up to this point.

But what happens when we're actually having to disseminate or interpret

whether a catalyst is actually meaningful or not

when we're looking at a stock price move and attempting to determine what actually moved the

price and whether it was a headline that moved it that was meaningful or not. Well, that just comes down to discretion, experience, common sense, and yes, experience means practice.

So if you recall our definition of a meaningful catalyst, it's any stock or sector news or event that moves the needle on KPIs and the quantitative, so revenue, earnings, and forward valuation. So anything that is related to the business that is operational that moves the needle. And that's something that catalyst in an ideal world should be unexpected. So we get a surprise to the market and the stock price move is impactful and meaningful. Additionally,

as you recall, it can be a technical news or event that can move the stock in the immediate future

too. But what you will do is at this stage is you'll go through the headlines and you'll start highlighting them so you can correlate them with the meaningful

stock moves that you've visually determined off the chart. So here, for example, we've highlighted

some press release headlines that could actually qualify as a potential meaningful catalyst.

That would require a bit more further work on to make sure that that is actually accurate.

So if we start from the bottom, December 2020, 1st of December 2020, JetBlue announces price of common stock offering.

That would be a catalyst if it was a big deal. As in, the stock

offering in dollar notional terms relative to the market cap was large. If it's not, and it's small,

then it's not a catalyst. What does that fall into? It falls into our technical catalyst category.

catalyst category.

Next, if we look at 1st of February 2021, JetBlue unveils completely reimagined mint,

setting the stage to change the transatlantic market with exceptional experience and competitive fares.

that could definitely qualify as a catalyst because the key word there is unveils.

So this could be the first time that the market is seeing a new service by JetBlue

and it could offer a big surprise to the market.

And after you've been through the process of actually optically looking at the chart,

if you remember with the JetBlue example, the JetBlue chart, we saw a big move up in February 2021.

So this could be the reason.

Next up, 18th of February 2021, JetBlue launches first phase of co-chair with American Airlines, adding new routes and destinations.

That can certainly qualify as a catalyst subject to further work.

The further work you would be doing would be to determine whether this is new information or not.

But there is a clue in the sentence there.

They're launching the first phase, so this could be relatively new information to the market.

Next, we're in March 2021, 23rd of March 2021, JetBlue

announces pricing of $650 million convertible senior notes offering. This again is a technical

press release, so it's affecting the technical situation in the stock. With something like this,

similar to the common stock offering,

you would have to look at the size of the deal relative to the market cap and figure out how

much this changes the balance sheet fundamentals of the company as well, because the company is

actually issuing debt that's convertible into equity. As it happens for this situation, $650 million at the time,

the market cap of JetBlue was around $6.5 billion.

So it's around 10% of the size of the market cap.

So this definitely qualifies as a potential catalyst

that could put a technical ceiling on the stock at certain levels

because of equity sellers who are hedging their convert exposure.

Next up, 25th of March 21, introducing Paisley by JetBlue,

a new travel website that takes all the work out of booking a trip.

Again, further work required here to determine if it's a genuine

catalyst to the upside for the stock, so whether this is new information to the market or not.

And of course, what the company thinks it means for the bottom line, so forward-looking estimates

and valuation. And really, that's what all of this comes down to, guys. Is it going to move the needle?

Next up, April 2021, 6th of April, JetBlue reveals plans to reinvent what it's like to

fly in coach across the Atlantic.

Now, this situation, it's...

quite likely that this headline actually refers back to the headline

or relates to the headline on the 1st of February,

where JetBlue unveiled a completely reimagined mint program

setting the stage to change the transatlantic market.

So again, you would go and have a look at this press release

and just work out if it's new information or not.

And it looks like it probably isn't.

Next up, 21st of April 21, enabled by its Northeast Alliance with American, JetBlue announces plans for expansion in New York and Boston to bring everyday low fares and great service to more routes and markets.

Could be a catalyst. Again, if it's new

information, that's your job to find out. Is it new information? Is it a genuine catalyst that's

going to surprise? Does it move the needle on KPIs? And of course, revenue and earnings estimates

and therefore forward-looking valuation. So all of these highlighted rows here

in the spreadsheet where we've looked at the headlines and we've disseminated, interpreted

the information are either definite catalysts in the past that have moved the stock price,

or they were potential catalysts that moved the stock price. All in all, this process that we're going through here is an exercise of finding out what actually moves the needle for this stock.

What type of announcements can we expect in the future to move the needle, and how frequent they actually are.

So that is non-earnings related press releases. What about non-earnings related

events and presentations? Well, you would go through a similar exercise again. You would simply run

through and highlight the ones in the past where we see some fairly significant stock price movement

and figure out whether these are normal or abnormal

days in the stock price movement or even weeks. So conference and investor days for all stocks,

they provide business updates and they're attended by shareholders. They can actually be very

meaningful, but you just never know till the day. Markets tend to get excited

before conferences and investor days. Stocks can rally into the event and then not do anything,

so trade sideways or then trade lower after the actual event if it's uninspiring or doesn't

actually move the needle on KPIs, revenue and earnings,

and looking forward with forward valuation.

But you do need to be on top of them because most of them will provide

some sort of catalyst to the stock price moving.

So when we go through the...

events and presentations that are non-earnings related. For our example, JetBlue, what we tend

to see is that we have a Barclays conference in February, a JP Morgan conference in March,

and a Wolf Research conference in May. So we're starting to build a picture here that may be the

most exciting period of time in the year for the stock JetBlue, where there's lots

of catalysts, is in Q1 and half of Q2. So this is the process you would go through, guys,

getting the total press releases, splitting them out into earnings and non-earnings related,

doing the same for events and presentations,

and then correlating the weekly and daily moves in the stock historically to press releases

and looking for the ones that are meaningful. Obviously, meaningful requires some interpretation

and experience and practice. However, you will get good at it over time if you just keep going

through the processes and doing the work. What this does for us, this process, is mainly two things.

Firstly, we get a real handle on how communicative management are in between earnings reports.

And also, we get a sense of, and not only a sense of, but a handle on what future catalysts are going to actually move the needle on KPIs and pretty much when they're actually going to happen.

So that's how this entire process is really useful because going forward, we have a good idea of what's going to move the stock in our 20 to 60 day time horizon

and how frequent the catalysts are going to be,

therefore the likelihood that we're going to get them in the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And we can actually sit down and pen what we think those catalysts are going to be.

And not only that, roughly when they're going to happen.

So this is something we'll

come to in a moment with JetBlue, our example. But first, seeing as though we're discussing

the difference between meaningful catalysts and non-meaningful catalysts, let's have a

look here at some examples of what a non-meaningful catalyst would be.

So you'll often see companies putting out headlines that mean absolutely nothing for KPIs, revenue, earnings, and forward-looking valuation.

So I've highlighted a whole bunch of non-meaningful catalysts here in green in our JetBlue example.

So an example of something that just means nothing,

a press release. So like in December 2020, 17th of December 2020, celebrating the season of giving,

JetBlue donates blankets, pillows, amenity kits,

headphones and other supplies to communities in need.

That's all very well and good.

That's just public relations, but it doesn't move the needle on KPIs,

revenue, earnings, and forward valuation.

So that's an easy one, but you will have situations where you look at potential catalysts

and it will be on the margin. It won't be so easy with your experience as a retail trader initially to determine whether it's an actual catalyst or not.

That's going to move the needle on KPIs, revenue, earnings and valuation.

This just comes down to common sense and practice.

So if we look at the top of the table here,

we'll see a few headlines as a good example of this. So 26th of April 2021, JetBlue's

first Airbus A220 to 300, featuring incredible comfort, lowering operating costs and superior performance enters scheduled service.

Next one, 29th of April 2021, JetBlue takes delivery of first Airbus A321LR aircraft,

enabling airline to launch first ever transatlantic service.

An inexperienced person in the market may look at those two headlines and think, yeah, this

is progress.

This is bullish.

I'm interpreting this as good news.

Therefore, now I should enter my long position in JetBlue because I've done all the fundamental

work and I believe it's a positive outlier and it's going to go up from the end of April

till the end of July. Well, that's pretty inexperienced in terms of interpretation,

because we need to use common sense here. Taking delivery of planes is the actual end result.

of planes is the actual end result. Unveiling new plans is what actually moves the needle.

So it's very likely that these two headlines, it's just PR. It's the end result. These are not meaningful catalysts because it's highly likely that this is not new information. A meaningful catalyst

is new information. That's what moves the needle on KPIs, revenue earnings, forward-looking quant,

and forward valuation. And if you remember from our meaningful catalyst that we had on the screen where we had the orange ribboned

rose in the spreadsheet we highlighted on the 1st of February 21 JetBlue

unveiling a completely reimagined mint well if we zoom

Zoom in and have a look at the chart here.

Guess what happened at the beginning of February?

Yes, the market reacted to this,

and the stock price went up from $15 to $21.

And don't forget, we also had a JPMorgan conference

that was set for March.

So imagine yourself sitting, going through this exercise

to potentially buy JetBlue around the beginning of February

or the end of January 2021.

And you can see in the Catalyst calendar,

meaningful Catalysts, where they're now announcing

a new program called Mint.

They're unveiling it.

And you know that the JPMorgan conference is coming up in March.

These are very strong catalysts that could potentially get the stock price moving.

And the stock price did.

It rallied hard from around $15 up to $21.

And did it in a very short space of time.

But now imagine yourself sitting at the present moment,

which is the beginning of May 2021.

If you've been through this whole exercise,

looking at past meaningful catalysts,

you'd be able to get a potential handle on frequency

and future potential catalysts.

So you put pen to paper or a cursor to spreadsheet,

and you start making a list of what could be potential catalysts moving forward.

So non-earnings-related catalysts that are going to move the needle on KPIs,

revenue and earnings, forward-looking quant, and forward-looking valuation.

So for JetBlue, our example, we know that we have the Wolf Research Conference via webcast in May 2021.

We've potentially got additional code-sharing announcements that could add incremental new routes and destinations.

We could have updates on the Mint and Transatlantic routes uptake once they've launched these programs.

We can have updates and headlines related to the convertible and equity offerings to fund expansion plans.

convertible and equity offerings to fund expansion plans.

And at the time, we did have an official date for the reopening of New York after COVID-19, so July 1st, 2021.

So anything with headlines related to domestic and international bookings volume.

domestic and international bookings volume.

On top of that, obviously, there's also competitor or sector catalysts that could occur if other airlines within the sector have catalysts that are occurring in the same time period

that could affect JetBlue.

So it would be a good idea to get a handle on the main ones for each of the competitor airlines in the sector as well.

And just as a side note, if you take a position in a stock and you've identified all of these potential catalysts going forward,

and then they either don't occur or they are uninspiring and the stock price doesn't react

to it, that is a data point for you potentially being wrong within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

So listen, we can't in this situation obviously predict everything, but we can identify whether a stock is a tumbleweed stock or not, and we can

make reasonable 20 to 60-day predictions for catalysts. So this is a process that we simply

have to go through because versus the rest of the market, this is where we can get a real edge in targeting absolute outsized returns.

Non-earnings related press releases and events and presentations that move the needle for KPIs in the business operation and for revenue and earnings, the forward quant and forward-looking

valuation. And always remember, catalysts is what sets apart the difference between traders

and investors. So let's summarize this. It's absolutely essential to identify potential meaningful catalysts because we are long-short portfolio managers and we have a trading mandate with a finite time horizon.

We are trading in the 20 to 60-day time horizon.

It's crucial for both timing and structuring of trade ideas.

Remember, a trade idea is not a trade idea.

It's not complete until we have identified catalysts.

An idea or a trade idea may not qualify as a trade idea

if the only catalyst that you can point your finger at

is the quarterly earnings

date, which is, for example, 45 trading days away. Now, of course, this doesn't mean that the stock

can't move before earnings. Of course, a surprise announcement may come in between earnings reports and or the stock could just massively

surprise positively or negatively on the actual earnings day. But this isn't the

point. Trading is about consistency, so consistency in both

both returns and in process and putting the odds in our favor.

If we continuously fill our portfolio with longs and shorts that have little evidence of management communication

and show little potential to move within our time horizon, within our 20 to 60 day time horizon,

then we're always going to have portfolios of tumbleweed

stocks. There are always at any one moment in time in the stock market, plenty of stocks that are

great longs and shorts. And they also have highly communicative management and investor relations

departments. And in addition, there's always plenty of great shorts that are around

that are terrible at communication and or all of a sudden just go very quiet

when things actually start to go wrong fundamentally.

Now, as I've mentioned, the area that you really should be focusing on here

once you understand the

mechanical process here is identifying meaningful catalysts that are non-earnings related. But

you don't have to worry about it. Just practice and get good at it. So identify meaningful non-earnings

related catalysts. Use your discretion.

You will get better at it over time.

Just remember, incremental new news to the market is the key here.

Mechanically, if you want to do a deep dive further to actually just visually

looking at a chart to correlate press releases and events and

presentations to see what moves the stock, you can obviously perform a distribution of returns,

statistical analysis, and you can correlate the biggest past daily and weekly moves in the stock

with the press releases and events and presentations. By doing that,

you're going to build up an internal database and you're going to get a full understanding

of what actually moves the stock. So just practice, practice, practice, guys. Catalysts

are very important to our overall trade idea generation process. And of course, what I've shown you here

is it is a template in terms of process.

The JetBlue example was simply an example of process

and it's a template.

You can apply it to any stock in any sector

throughout time forever.

So that's it for Catalyst, guys.

Let's shoot straight in to the next video where we're actually going to look at a trade

idea generation template to help you with your consistency in processing.

Thank you.