Okay, so welcome back to the screen guys.

What we're actually going to do here now, we're going to continue with the trade idea generation process.

But what we're actually going to do here is marry up the macro and the micro.

So we're going to take a slight detour from previous videos because you can get trade ideas in many different places.

previous videos because you can get trade ideas in many different places. We're going to be looking at generating trade ideas from macroeconomic indicators. So

what does this involve? Well it's utilizing macro data that is driving the

performance of individual stocks, so individual equities. So what we're doing is we're getting trade ideas

in individual stocks that are driven by macro data.

So if you think way back to the first part

of the PTM video series,

when we were looking at macroeconomic leading indicators,

we were using them primarily to obtain a portfolio bias

but something else we can do and it was mentioned during that part of the ptm video series

is we can actually use leading indicators for trade idea generation in individual equities

individual equities. So what we're going to do in this video is we're going to bring the macro quantitative and the micro quantitative together as an example of how you would regularly go about

processing this data to infer trends and potential trade ideas from macro data and micro data combined.

Now what you're going to see as we go through this video is that the most

important thing here is to establish a link between the data from the macroeconomic

indicators and the forward-looking valuation data at the

micro level so from the sector quantitative analysis so we'll get into

all the details as we go through the video but our very first step is always

to establish a trend or a change of trend in the macro data.

And then what we're looking to do

is we're attempting to marry this up

with the right stocks in the sector

that are displaying forward-looking valuations

and growth profiles that are agreeing with the macro data.

So what we're gonna do here by way of an example,

if you recall the macroeconomic leading indicator dashboard,

we're not going to go through every single macroeconomic

leading indicator that can provide individual equities trade ideas. What we're going to do

is we're going to look at the ISM manufacturing report on business and all of the processes that

we go through utilizing the ISM manufacturing numbers can be repeated with the ISM non-manufacturing report on business. So the services sector.

So yes, of course you can get individual stock

or equities trade ideas from other surveys.

And what we're going to do actually in the next video,

we're going to look on the right-hand side of the macro leading indicator

dashboard, and we're going to be looking at international trade ideas generated by macro

data. In addition, to these two videos where we're looking at the manufacturing, and in

the next video, we're looking at international surveys. You can get trade ideas in individual equities from other leading indicators, like,

for example, the Census Bureau's monthly report on building permits. You can also get individual

stock trade ideas from cyclical commodities prices. And you can also, for example, look at corporate credit spreads.

So where you see, for example, credit conditions worsening in certain sectors or improving in certain sectors,

this can obviously feed into the valuation of equities within those sectors.

But by way of an introduction here where we're using macro data to generate individual stock

trade ideas, we're going to concentrate here on the ISM manufacturing index.

And the example we're going to use is the sheet that's in the

downloads area. And this is going to be for April 2021. So everything we go through in this video

on the screen, you can look at the data in the downloads area. And also, if you are keeping the entire history

of the ISM manufacturing index and updating it every month,

you'll easily be able to navigate to all of this data

for that particular month.

So let's take a look at this,

and let's begin looking at the ISM history visually.

And we can see here that we've circled a peak in the ISM manufacturing data in recent years.

history. So the data here is going back in this chart to 1998. But we're looking at the most recent peak, which was actually in March 2021. So what we're looking at here is obviously an inflection point in the U.S. manufacturing sector. And if we look at this non-pictorally,

so non-visually on a chart,

and we actually look at the tables of data

for the PMI and all of its components,

you can see at the bottom here,

so the data's going back to July 2018 up till April 21. You can see at the bottom here, so the data's going back to July 2018 up till April 21.

You can see at the bottom here we've highlighted in red

March 2021 and April 2021.

And you can see at the headline number,

the headline PMI in March 2021,

that was the peak on our chart that we looked at. That number is 64.7.

And then there's a slowdown.

So quite a sharp slowdown of four points to 60.7 in April 2021.

And if we look at the component data.

So first of all, we look at at new orders which often leads the component

index we see a slowdown from 68 to 64.3

what we also see in terms of our moves contributing to the aggregate going down

we see a slowdown in production we see a slowdown in production, we see a slowdown in employment conditions, and also we see a draw in inventories.

So imagine yourself doing this analysis sitting in the month of April.

So at the beginning of April, what would have been happening?

what would have been happening? Well, if we go back to the chart for a second,

at the beginning of April, we would have had the March number reported.

And of course, we wouldn't have had the April number reported,

because that's reported in the first week of May.

So we'd be sitting here looking at a very, very high level on the ISM. So there's 64.7.

And we would probably start to get very concerned that the ISM can go no higher from that point.

So we'd probably be thinking to ourselves at that stage, we are nearing an inflection point.

And the only way is down. And then in the first week of May, we are getting our April number and then that moves down very sharply. So we get our confirmed turning point leading to a

possible trend. So when you're going through this data, looking at it visually, and then

analyzing it in the tables, you obviously have to make inferences here, something that

you'll get used to over time with experience and connecting it to particular sectors. But

let's stay on the aggregate data for a second and the component data.

And let's have a look at the direction and rate of change that's denoted in the month of April, which is reported in the first week of May.

so at the aggregate level we have our number of 60.7 dropping from in march 64.7 so we're down four points and the direction yes we're still in a condition of growth we know that's because we're

above 50 the ism is above 50 so we growing, but the rate of change is slower.

And the trend in months for growth is 11 months.

For the contributory component data, so new orders, production, employment,

we have the same conditions contributing

to the aggregate number,

but it's the same conditions as the aggregate number.

We see deliveries slowing down so the direction is slowing and the rate of change is slowing down

at a slower pace and in ventures this is where we're seeing a real change here because we get a change in direction for the first month.

So the direction is now contracting so our inventories number is 46.5 dropping from 50.8 so contracting and the rate of change from growing.

So the manufacturing sector is denoted as growing and growing at a slower pace with a trend of 11 months

and the overall economy is denoted the same,

growing but at a slower pace with 11 month trend.

So what we're seeing here is peak conditions

potentially and we're seeing some cracks appearing especially in the drawdown with inventories which

are now contracting. So remember these numbers for March they will have been reported at the beginning of April,

and the April numbers will have been reported in May.

So on the first business day of each of those months.

So over time, what you're gonna be doing every month

is going through these steps,

and just inferring what is actually happening in the ISM manufacturing PMI and the component parts,

and inferring, along with all of your other macro data, a portfolio bias.

But when you're actually using leading indicators like the ISM manufacturing data,

you're going to be looking at the sector data.

So essentially what we're doing is we're looking at the sector data with a backdrop of macroeconomic trend.

So for this example, we are sitting in the month of April and we're assuming that we've just seen the March

data come out for the ISM manufacturing number and we're going to be looking at

furniture and related products as a sector and we're going to be looking at

transportation equipment so if you recall how we actually organize this data, if you recall from the video on

the ISM manufacturing, which is video seven, we organize the sector data by ranking the

18 sectors by the sector that's growing the most to the sector that's either growing the least or contracting.

And we do this by the most recent month.

So here for an academic exercise,

we've organized it in April 21.

So the data for April that's reported in the first week of May and

we've ranked from 18 so that's electrical equipment appliances and

components all the way down to the bottom which is number one so growing the

least which is wood products now if we were sitting in the first week of April,

this is something you would do with the March data.

So you would rank in the same way that we've done here for April data.

You would rank from highest to lowest in descending order of growth

and yes if we were sitting in the first week of April looking at this March data

organizing the data by most growth to least growth we'd probably start looking

at the sectors that are growing the most and growing the least. So the ones that are the extremities.

So for example, in this table, looking at the March data, we'd probably be looking at

textile mills, which comes in at 17, electrical equipment, appliances and computers.

components which comes in at 16 and also looking at machinery in the other extreme so growing the

least or not growing at all or even contracting we'd probably be looking at wood products which

comes in at zero because it's a neutral direction we'd also be looking at petroleum and coal products, which comes in as the lowest growth at ranked number one on a relative basis.

And we'd also probably looking at printing, which comes in with a ranking of two.

But for the purposes of this example, what we're going to be looking at here are the two sectors, furniture and related products, so potentially looking at long ideas in that sector and looking at transportation equipment, so potentially looking at short ideas.

ideas. And you can see the rankings in the March data. So remember March data reported

first week of April. Furniture and related products comes in at a level of 12 in terms of relative ranking for growth relative to other sectors. And transportation equipment

comes in at 6. So if we were ranking these in March, if we were sitting in the first week of April,

furniture and related products at 12, transportation equipment at six. They're not in the extremities,

but furniture and related products would be towards the higher end of growth,

transportation equipment at the lower end of growth.

What we're also looking at as well is the trend over the last six months.

So if we look at furniture and related products going back to November 2020 up till the March 21 data,

what we see is relatively low growth in November 20 at a two ranking,

jumping in December to a 15 ranking,

then back down in January and February to relatively low levels scoring or ranking four and two,

and then a big jump in March.

Interpreting this data, this is kind of what you would expect due to seasonality. With transportation equipment, going back to November 20

and looking at the six-month trend,

we have a growth in November 20 coming in at a three ranking.

It jumps on a relative basis quite big in December 20

to a 10 ranking, and then we have that again in January 21.

We have a 9 ranking so not much move there in Feb 21 and then a drop in March 21.

So yes hindsight is a wonderful thing and we can look at

at the data and we can say okay well if we were sitting in the first week of May

how all of this worked out well on the six month trend we got continued growth

in furniture and related products and we got a continued growth but slowdown of

growth for transportation equipment in April 21 but But of course, we don't have the benefit

of that hindsight of the whole six month trend

when we're sitting in the first week of April

and getting the March 21 data.

What we're looking for here is some sort of pattern recognition

for longs and shorts in the data and what we're really looking for is divergence.

So divergence on a relative basis. And if we look at the change in furniture and related products from the Feb data to the March data,

we see a jump, positive jump of 10 points.

And then for transportation equipment, we see a negative move.

So we see the ranking going down in Feb 21 from 9 to 6 in March 21.

So there's definitely divergence occurring there.

So this would actually get our interest if we're looking at this data correctly.

If we're interested in potential longs in the furniture and related product sector and potential shorts in the transportation equipment sector.

And of course if you marry up ideas long furniture and short transportation equipment

by default what you're actually doing is you're creating a cross sector spread trade

at the sector level to figure out where this divergence is actually coming from

to figure out where this divergence is actually coming from.

And here we've got new orders.

So if we look at new orders in furniture and related products,

we imagine ourselves again sitting in the first week of April.

The data's out.

We're doing our work, looking for potential trade ideas.

We're now looking for divergence at the new orders level. If we look at furniture and related products,

we're going from zero, neutral, in February 21,

to a ranking of 10 on relative growth in March 21.

And then with transportation equipment,

we're seeing a ranking of eight on relative growth for the month of February 21,

and then dropping four points or four rankings in March 21.

to a ranking of four. If we look at the next one where we're getting divergence

this is occurring in inventories so if we look at furniture and related

products first over those five months November 20 to March 21 we're getting

contraction November 20 contraction December 20 then a big jump

in Jan 21 so a big inventory build on a relative basis so a ranking of nine

coming from minus five in December 20 then in Feb, we're getting a zero ranking with neutral.

And then we're jumping to a ranking of four

in terms of growth for March 21.

So this is interesting for inventories

coming from the furniture and related product sector

because what we're seeing over that five-month trend

is an aggressive drawdown in inventories running into the holiday period.

Then as soon as we get into the new year, a big inventory build and then a slowdown of inventories.

What we're probably seeing here from the sector is an inventory build in expectation of growth conditions coming in April and the build in January in Jan, that inventory is being used

to satisfy the demand in future months.

Now of course in order for us to locate some divergence here we have to look at what's

happening in transportation equipment so in November 20 where we've got a zero

ranking of neutral December 20 growth ranking of one and in Jan 21 we're

neutral again at a zero ranking the same happening in Feb 21, and then we get what looks like a fairly aggressive

negative move to the downside.

We get a ranking of negative three

with a direction of contraction.

So if we think about this in terms of divergence,

furniture and related products,

Feb to March, zero to four.

Transportation equipment, neutral for two months.

So January 21, February 21,

lowest of growth in December 20,

neutral in November 20,

and then going negative contraction,

negative three in March 21. So even just on a one month basis,

there's divergence there when comparing the two sectors. But there's also quite a bit of divergence occurring if we just look at

the first quarter of the year. So Jan 21 to March 21.

So what would happen here, you'd recognize that divergence is occurring between two different

sectors, and then you'd move to the next stage. So we would start looking at the sectors themselves.

And we're going to start here with the transportation equipment sector. And we're going to start here with the transportation equipment sector.

And we're going to look at the quantitative data for the sector and apply our quantitative processing steps that we've been through earlier in the video series.

So what do we have here?

We are looking first at the short or potentials as implied by the ISM numbers. We're looking at the

transportation equipment sector and we're looking at all of the quantitative.

So what's our first step? Well as you've seen in previous parts of the PTM video

series our first step is always to clean up our spreadsheets.

We want to clean up the data. And here, the data has been cleaned as of March 1st, 2021,

and had a minimum $30 billion filter for market capitalization applied to the sector,

because we are looking at potentially

shorting stocks here. So if you look at the table, you'll see some of our quantitative numbers.

The cells have been overwritten following our data cleaning exercises, and we've arrived at sector averages for our quantitative so for earnings growth

in 2021 so eg1 we have 46.83% earnings growth in 21 versus 2020 earnings growth Earnings growth 2, which is our 2022 EPS, so 22 versus 21, comes in at 38.87%.

We have an average price earnings ratio for the current year, forward-looking 2021, so PE1 of 29.26 and for the next financial year so EG2 which is 2022 our PE is 24.44

we have a current forward looking peg so current year forward peg one of 1.63 and then a peg to 2022 next financial year 1.21.

Now what we've done here is we've ranked from top to bottom

by market cap and some discretionary work

We are zooming in and focusing on companies in the sector that are purer plays.

So those that don't have highly diversified revenue and earnings in the sector.

So we arrive at looking at TDG, Transdine Group, and PACAR, PCAR.

PACAR, PCAR, not just because their earnings growth profiles and valuations relative to the sector average might be interesting to us from a short perspective, but also because

of the revenue and earnings mix of the companies relative to other stocks in the sector.

relative to other stocks in the sector.

Why? Because we want the purest plays possible in the sector

with the most potential downside.

So TGG and PACA are purer plays versus other stocks

because they're not as diversified in their revenues

and earnings.

Also both fit the market cap short minimum.

So if you recall, when it comes to market cap,

we're roughly looking at $20 billion plus.

So here, we put a minimum of $30 billion

to isolate everything in the sector,

every stock in the sector

that has over a $30 billion market cap.

Now, the quantitative is how you identify potential plays,

but you do also have to use some discretion and learn about the stocks as you're going along.

And both TDG and PECA have differing earnings growth

profiles. They are classed as being in the same sector, transportation equipment. However, they are

in different businesses within the same sector. So TDG is specifically in aircraft components, and PECAR, P-C-A-R, is in trucks and parts.

Now, Viv, why would TGG and PECAR be interesting to us?

Well, relative to the sector average,

TDG is a turnaround or value trap potential,

and PECAR has slightly better than average earnings growth one and lower than

average earnings growth two. And also on a forward-looking valuation, TDG trades at a premium

to the sector and PECA trades at a discount. And both have pegs that are below one and below the sector average peg.

So these quantitative profiles combined with their revenue and earnings mix relative to

the sector is interesting to us from a short perspective.

So if you think about the messages that the ISM sector data, what the respondents are saying

on a sector basis, and remember the measurements are sectors relative to other sectors.

We think about that backdrop and deterioration basis for equipment.

Obviously we want to be short,

either the worst or very close to being the worst stocks in the sector.

And this feeds these conditions from the ISM after a lag feed into revenue and earnings.

And we are attempting to marry up the macro and the micro.

And the micro involves finding what we believe to be stocks that will

get hurt the most in this example with a short in transportation equipment stocks that will get

hurt the most in the sector relative to others if the backdrop of the sector continues to deteriorate.

So the quantitative of TDG and per car is interesting to us.

We identify these situations and of course we then do further work.

Now when it comes to divergence, we of course look on the other side

and we long sectors coming from the implied moves

in the sector data on a relative basis from the ISM.

So we're gonna be looking now at furniture

and home furnishing stores.

So again, the data has been cleaned as of March 1st, 21, and in this instance,

no market cap minimum or maximum has been applied. Now, when it comes to our long discipline,

in the table, you can look at the market caps, RH and WSM, Williams-Sonoma, both of those stocks are both out of our market cap,

self-imposed long limit range of a $3 billion

to $10 billion market cap.

So that leaves Purple Innovation,

At Home Group and Bed Bath and Beyond.

So looking at the table, when we look at these stocks,

both PRPL, Purple Innovation,

and BBBY, Bed Bath & Beyond,

they have very large EG1 numbers

that are dropping significantly for the second period, EG2.

However, their EG2 numbers

do still outperform the sector average. Now, of course, we would do

further work on all of these stocks. However, for the purposes of this illustration, we've chosen to go with home. This is because PRPL and

BBBY, they're skewing the EG1 average number massively for the sector, and they're potentially

both benefiting from the laws of small and negative numbers. But of course, in real life,

when you're going through this, you would probably be doing work on all three of these

stocks and determining what the real situation is. Now, at home group, home is a similar earnings growth profile to TDG,

even though they're in totally different sectors,

so they can both be classified as potential turnarounds or value traps.

However, when you think about the macro backdrop, the sector data from ISM,

what respondents in the survey are reporting at this moment in time, according to that data,

TDG has a sector headwind and home has a sector tailwind. And also in the transportation equipment sector PECAR

also has a sector headwind as implied by the macro data with some of the lowest

PE multiples so forward-looking valuation in the sector so if we were

running through this as a case study in, we can look at how this type of trade performed over our time horizon.

So let's look at our long first at home group.

What do they actually do?

Well, they own and operate home decor stores, very straightforward operation. So they're selling furniture, home furnishings, wall decor,

decorative accents, rugs and housewares, et cetera.

And predominantly in the United States.

Let's have a look on the chart what this stock actually did

after ISM numbers came out.

So you can see here in the first week of April,

this is where the March ISM numbers were reported.

And you can see at the beginning of May,

this is where the April ISM number was reported.

So that survey data that we looked at,

the sector data from the ISM survey, these are the points at which those numbers were reported.

So the relative sector numbers where we spotted divergence.

So if we just think of the performance here of the stock home in the month of April for example so after

or the moment that the March ISM data was released up until the moment where

the April ISM data was released at the beginning of May

So we think about the April performance of this stock price.

The stock is basically going from $26 to around $33.

So a $7 performance of a starting number, starting base of around 26, which gives us about a 27% return in one month.

return in one month. Now, what's interesting about this case study is that the jump that you see in the stock price, where it's going from around $33 at the beginning of May and jumping up to $36,

so that gap, the move up there, that was because the company was bid for and a takeover announcement occurred

from a private equity company called Hellman and Friedman.

So why this case study is so interesting and so good is because if we were going through our processes at the time,

looking through the ISM,

trying to get macro implied single stock trades from our ISM sector analysis,

going through those processes,

you would have probably looked at something like

home group in your analysis.

So your timing would have been pretty amazing.

So you're sitting at the beginning of April 2021,

and you're looking at the March ISM data coming out

and looking at divergence in the sector data, then looking at the micro

work as well and going through the quantitative and going through those processes, you will

have drilled down and zoomed in potentially on home group and got exposure to that.

And these things sometimes happen. Why? Because the processes

that we're going through are the same processes that smart money are going through in the market

at the same time. And they will have been doing the same analysis and coming to the same conclusions

as us if we're going through the whole process, identifying the stock, using the quantitative,

identifying what type of trade it is,

and then on top of that,

doing all of the extra work in the process.

They will have come to the same

or very similar conclusions

that Home Group is a turnaround story

with merit from a bottom-up perspective with macro and sector tailwinds.

And what ends up happening about five weeks, six weeks after we identified private equity

bid for the stock and take it private. Now we're not saying this happens all the time, obviously,

but we've used this as an example because it does happen. We are doing the same analysis

as the smart money in the market. Why? Because our processes are the processes of smart money.

processes are the processes of smart money. In the majority of cases, if you have all of your ducks lined up in a row, all the boxes are ticked and everything in the process is giving you a green

light. In the majority of situations, you're going to get a nice organic move that you can capture in the stock price

within the 20 to 60 day time horizon but sometimes you do get a bit lucky in your

time horizon in the minority of cases you do get lucky sometimes and sometimes

there's an announcement like this, like a takeover.

Now, what about the particular case study here?

Well, let's start with TDG.

Remember, these guys were very concentrated relative to other stocks in the sector in terms of their revenue and earnings.

And these guys were in the aircraft components manufacturing business

so if we look at the chart of TDG we can again look at the performance of the stock

if we traded short at the beginning of April when we got the March ISM data

beginning of April when we got the March ISM data and the beginning of May when we got the April ISM data.

So you can see here with TDG, if we think about April performance here, the stock's moving

roughly from a level of $590 up to about 620. So that's a $30 move of a 590 base.

But then the stock drops back to around 595, 600

in the last week of April.

But it does end the month around $610.

So over that month of April, the stock does go up to a high of around $620, $630.

So you're looking at a $30, $40 move on the stock from the $590 level. So we're looking at a peak performance in the month of April of around between 5% and almost

7% before the stock goes back down again to be around flat on the month or just a little

bit better than that in the last week of April.

and then ends the month at around $610,

which is a $20 increase of $590 at the beginning of the month.

So you're basically looking at a 3, 3.5% monthly performance

after the March ISM is reported.

Look at this performance in the same time period on a chart relative to home group and look at it

indexed to 100. But here we're going back one month more and indexing to 100 from the beginning of

March. And that's just to display really when the big divergence started occurring.

So we can see this in the total picture.

And both before the takeover announcement for Home Group was out publicly in the market

and after the takeover announcement was out there,

after the takeover announcement was out there.

Home Group was outperforming TDG by a very good margin,

both before and after that announcement.

So if we look at total performance here,

after the takeover announcement,

you're looking at Home group up 34.89% after the April ISM was reported and after the takeover announcement and that's in comparison to TDG and over that time period the whole time

period we're looking at a 75 basis point or let's say 1% move in the stock which essentially means it didn't really move it's flat

but even before the April ISM is reported at the beginning of May we can

see that there's divergence and we can see for example in the last few trading days of April we can see that home

group is up around 25 percent versus TDG which is again essentially flat so divergence is occurring in the stock prices after the March ISM is reported and continues after the April ISM is reported.

After the April ISM is reported, that's mainly down to the takeover.

But what's interesting as well is that there was actually some divergence in the month of March.

some divergence in the month of March.

So imagine we were sitting there at the beginning of April,

and we were looking at our sector data from the ISM.

We were looking at various home furnishings,

stocks, furniture stocks, and we were looking at various home furnishings,

and doing the quantitative qualitative assessment on a few of them we may have even started looking

at technical indicators and price action as well in terms of timing and divergence from stocks like

home group versus its own sector versus other stocks across the market versus other sectors as well may have

actually indicated a good time for us to go in to stocks like home group because we were getting

indications of divergence in the near past so in terms of price action.

Now, what about our other short PACAR, E-C-A-R?

If you remember, this was also selected in the quantitative as also having more concentrated revenue and earnings relative to the sector,

but also as having inferior quantitative relative to sector averages,

especially when it came to valuation.

So in terms of valuation on a discount to the sector

and identifying this stock as a potential negative outlier.

So what do these guys do?

Well, they design, develop, manufacture and distribute light, medium and heavy-duty trucks

and the aftermarket distribution of parts.

If we look at this stock at the time in absolute terms, like we did with TDG first,

what are we looking at here? Well, actually, in the month of April, after the March ISM was reported,

this stock over the month actually went down. So we're looking at a stock price over the month of April that went from around $92.50 down to $90.

So we're looking at an almost negative 3% move down for the released at the beginning of May.

The stock rallied that week quite quickly to above 95.

So we can see here, no surprises.

If we look at this relative to home group,

we get a similar spread performance over the entire period

as we do when we look at home group versus TDG.

Essentially, the stocks that we identified

as negative outliers in the transportation equipment sector,

so per car and TDG,

they were both flat or up tiny over the whole period.

However, per car, in the month of April itself,

performed worse than TDG.

And this type of stock price performance over this period,

so the month of April after the ISM data for March is released.

This type of stock price performance does speak to the valuation of the discount for forward-looking PE.

When we were doing our quantitative processing and identifying potential negative outliers.

If you recall, PACA was on quite a big discount to the sector, whereas T, in terms of forward-looking PE,

was actually on a premium to the sector average. So it's very likely that if we were sticking to

our guns, sticking to our processes here in the quantitative, it's more

than likely that we would have chosen par car as our short. So you can see here over our 20 to 60

day time horizons, you can process very efficiently, very optimally, and infer potential trade ideas in single stocks when you're marrying up both the macro and the micro.

And what we looked at here in this video in terms of the case studies happens time and time again in U.S. equity markets.

Because we are actually implementing professional trader processes and even professional

investor processes, we are doing the same work as institutional money, the same work as institutional

traders and investors. They are looking at the same things that you are looking at. They are spotting the same macro and micro trends.

And many of them will be generating the same or very similar ideas in single stock equities.

So you can get light bulb indications or clues of where to look in the stock market from the ISM surveys

in order to generate trade ideas. What have you got to do? You've got to go through a monthly

quantitative and qualitative process of organizing all the numbers and the statements and look for those trends and turning points

in the aggregate data and also at the sector level. Then, of course, you've got to get the

right sectors and the right stocks within those sectors as identified by your process

by your best practices, so by your sector quant analysis.

On top of that, you obviously have to still go through the qualitative work

and all of the other processes that we're going through in the video series

to identify potential stocks that are going to move from the indicated trends

and divergence in the ISM.

So when you're using the ISM, use it as a place to get clues as to what might be happening in

certain sectors, then go through the rest of your processes that are required to actually generate what we define as a trade idea.

Do not jump the gun. No shortcuts, please. And do not look at a number in the ISM, so the sector data,

then look for any stock in the sector without doing further work. Then think it's a trade idea and put a position on.

You've got to do a lot more work than that.

And additionally, and as a reminder, we said this earlier in the video series,

do not rely on the ISM as your only place that you look for potential trade ideas.

ISM as your only place that you look for potential trade ideas. Now, when it came to our example that we used here, of course, we would at the time also be looking at other sectors in the ISM

that exhibited trend changes or continuations of strong trend. And I can tell you now at the time, and this will be the same every month,

there were other sectors from the March and April ISM data and the six months sector data

where we could have gotten very strong potential ideas from. The beauty of this example that we used,

the processing example that we used, is that it's very simple to understand and it's very easy to replicate. It can be repeated on a step-by-step basis, not just for ISM manufacturing data going forward, but also non-manufacturing data, so the ISM services numbers.

So the ISM services numbers.

And always remember, guys,

the ISM doesn't tell you exactly what to do.

It's not a plug and play rule book. What we're doing here is we're organizing quantitative data

to look for potential opportunities

via our process of identification

and using clues that we pick up from the ISM data.

The process that we're going through here, where we're marrying up the macro and the micro,

it's an identification process. Again, this is the same as the

discovery or identification phase when we're looking at only the micro level and we're

doing quant processing at the sector level after we've already established a portfolio

bias from the aggregate macro data and then when we go straight into sectors to look for

positive and negative outliers.

into sectors to look for positive and negative outliers.

So when we're marrying up macro and micro,

and we're looking at organizing ISM manufacturing or services data at the sector level

and trying to look at trends and divergence,

we're essentially going through a similar identification process as when we do at the micro level for our quantitative processing.

So it's sector, trend, sector, divergence, identification from ISM data, and then quantitative processing, identification of positive and negative outliers at the quantitative

level, and then marrying the two up.

And yes, it can take a bit of practice and experience to get used to this.

But you can see from our case study in the video, which is very typical of things that

go on in financial markets after macro

data is released in single equities, you can see from our example that the returns are

worth the work.

And it's worth mentioning here again, do not forget the four principles of ITPM and do not forget that you absolutely have to be a self-starter to get consistency.

No one is going to do the work for you. You have to do the work here. You've got to be self-sustainable,

have a strong work ethic, get the free information like we've seen here today, and work smart and not hard.

As a reminder from earlier in the video series with the ISM data, valuable information can be

gleaned from it on a monthly basis if you do have the self-starter mentality and you actually do the

work yourself. You've got to do your own work, generate your own trade ideas,

and make your own returns. There's no spoon-feeding or copy trading at the professional level.

You have to process alone and efficiently to establish a portfolio bias, identify positive

and negative outliers, and everything in between for your chosen sector and do the extra work

for the backwards looking quant

and the forward looking qualitative information

to support your quant identification process.

And in addition, again, process alone and efficiently

generate potential trade ideas that are inferred from ISM data both at the

aggregate level and what we've looked at today the sector data at the sector

level for trends and divergence. Be organized, maintain folders for your ideas

by distilling down to the most important information for each potential idea

utilizing our trade idea template. As a trader portfolio manager, your trade ideas are your

inventory. An inventory is the oxygen to your long-short portfolio. Small amounts of low quality ideas make profitable long short

portfolio management absolutely impossible. You constantly need an

abundance of high quality fresh and current trade ideas to feed your long

short portfolio. Work on your, find the time to do it. And on a weekly basis, you're aiming to generate

two new fresh years per week to support your already healthy trade idea inventory. You need

to do this work on a regular basis of the self-starter mentality to get consistency and to get to the top of the

competency hierarchy to the professional level. Okay, so guys, that brings us to the end of this

video. So we're done here with our examples and case studies of how to marry up the macro and micro analysis in order to generate trade ideas.

Let's move straight into the next video

where we're going to be looking at generating

international trade ideas via ADRs. you