Okay, so we are back at the screen. Welcome to video 33, where we're now going to be looking at the trade idea template.

There is a download accompanied to this video, the trade idea template Word document.

So please download that when we go into the details of the Trade Idea template.

But first, before we get into that, we have to set the scene. As a quick reminder, you should be very

familiar with this now, the ProTrader Systematic Process, long short portfolio management with a 20 to 60 day time horizon. And you should be well briefed by now

that the trade idea generation process is not just fundamentals. It's fundamentals plus timing plus

trade structure around catalysts. Now at this juncture, it's worth pointing out what trade structuring actually is.

So what are we actually referring to when we mention trade structuring? We've alluded to some basics in

the past, but at this juncture, we just have to cement the definition before we move on. What we're

essentially referring to is options structures that fit the trade idea that

you've just come up with. So the trade idea that you've just generated. But you have to remember

a trade idea is not fully complete without catalysts and even your trade structure.

and even your trade structure. So before you look at catalysts and potential trade structures, what you've actually got is what you consider to be a fundamental long or short idea. However,

it's not fully a trade idea yet at that stage. You need catalyst identification,

yet at that stage. You need catalyst identification, which is going to bias your trade structure.

So when you've been through the first part of the trade idea generation process,

and you've decided that a stock is either a fundamental long or a short, and then you've actually identified catalysts. Well, at that stage, as traders, we have choices in how we structure the trade.

So we can go longer stock, we can buy a stock,

or we can short stock outright in a cash-for-stock transaction.

So if we're going long, we actually own the stock.

If we're shorting the stock outright, we're doing it on stock borrow through the broker. But that is a one-for-one transaction, cash or stock position. So that is an outright position. There's no leverage here. All we can do is

do this on margin. So for example, in the United States, where you can have a 50% overnight margin

requirement, that would be leveraging your margin two for one. But essentially, you're either owning

the stock or shorting the stock, you're just leveraged two for one, 50% margin requirement.

Or if you're an international guy and you can access contracts

for difference on your brokerage platform, CFDs, you're not actually going long the stock or

shorting the stock. You're taking a position in a derivative instrument called a CFD, and you can

get up to five times leverage at this moment in time but more realistically on average you're

looking at four times leverage on top of that and this is accessible by both US and

international traders we can opt for a plethora of directional stock options structures so we're not

taking a position outright in the stock or on margin in the stock or

leveraging up using derivative instruments like CFDs. What we're doing is we're using

derivative instruments called stock options. Now, for the purposes of the PTM video series,

we are not going to be covering these structures as we've mentioned previously in the video series, we are not going to be covering these structures as we've mentioned previously

in the video series. Why? Because it's a lot of work additional to what we're covering in the PTM

video series. Learning all of the directional option structures that are utilized on a continual

basis by pro-level traders, that is an entire video series in itself. And that's covered in our

Professional Options Trading Masterclass video series. So completing the POTM video series

is essential for learning how to do this. We highly recommend that you complete the POTM video series after you've completed the IPLT and PTM video series.

But what's important to understand here is that everything you're learning in the PTM video series

assumes that in the end, you will be taking a long or short stock position, either outright or on margin or via CFD. Now, as a side note,

when it comes to timing as part of the overall trade idea generation process, don't worry,

we will be coming to this a little later in the PTM video series. So at this stage,

in the PTM video series. So at this stage, it's worth understanding

the background of where we've come from

and where we've arrived.

So let's go through the entire trade idea generation process

and look at each video that's covered

each area of the trade idea generation process, what we've actually covered, and what steps we

actually took, because these are the steps you're going to be taking. So we started out introducing

you to the quantitative phase with video 22, quant processing one, and we were looking at

forward-looking valuation. Then with video 23, quant processing two, we were looking at forward-looking valuation. Then with video 23, quant processing

two, we were looking at forward-looking growth. So our growth metrics like earnings growth and

revenue growth. Then in video 24, quant processing three, we were looking at forward growth ratings,

we were looking at forward growth ratings, so specifically peg ratio, and looking at backwards looking quantitative supporting statements. In video 25, Quant Processing 4, we looked at

specifically the actual mechanics of long trade ideas, and we were looking at and focusing on the subset of earnings growth profiles

for long position optimization. And then in video 26, Quant Processing 5, we looked at the flip

side of that, the mechanics of short ideas. So earnings growth profiles that are optimal for short position ideas.

Then in video 27, Quant Processing 6, we looked at for diversification purposes, turnarounds and value traps and how we treat them,

fully recognizing along the way that these are suboptimal yet necessary earnings growth profiles for portfolio

diversification of ideas. Then in video 28, Quant Processing 7, we looked at the common data mining and processing mistakes

that most retail traders will experience in the outset when they're starting out.

will experience in the outset when they're starting out.

And we went through these to ensure that you can perfect the quant processing stage quicker and more efficiently in your educational development.

And then in video 29, we recapped the entire quantitative process and we put everything

together so you better understand the entire

process. Then we moved on to the qualitative assessment, where we started looking at key

performance indicators, KPIs. So we looked at essentially the business drivers behind the growth

rates of a company, as in what is actually driving the business and the valuation.

And from that, we infer a management operating plan.

In video 31, qualitative assessment 2, we started tying up the loose

ends of the qualitative. So we end up doing a quality assessment and we gauge the parameters

of market expectations and the range for those expectations. And then in video 32,

we covered the key ingredient that we have to add to our trade idea generation process

for a fundamental long or short potential trade idea actually becoming a trade

idea and that is definable catalysts, catalyst identification. What are we doing there? We're

assessing management communication and what can potentially move the needle in between earnings reports. And now we've arrived at video 33, the trade idea generation template.

So the question is here, why do we even bother with a trade idea generation template in the first place?

Well, it's about discipline and it's about consistency.

place. Well, it's about discipline and it's about consistency. The entire trade idea generation process that you see here on the screen and what we've covered in the PTM video series for that

process up to this point, everything goes in the trade idea generation template for every idea that

you generate. If you do this going forward for every trade idea that you generate.

If you do this going forward for every trade idea that you come up with, you're going

through essentially a discipline of a checklist.

You are formalizing the process into a consistent format.

The more you do it, the more familiar you will become with the process and the better you will become at it.

And even when you become good at it, you need to keep doing it out of discipline.

You need to engage in this discipline regularly on repeat forever.

Because regularity and familiarity breeds consistency.

Consistency in process leads to consistency in returns.

Now, of course, we've called this slide here the entire trade idea generation process.

Of course, you may actually be generating trade ideas from macro indicators, but primarily the macroeconomic indicators, the leading indicator dashboard, primarily this is for establishing a portfolio bias. But yes, of course, macro indicators for diversification purposes in your portfolio

at any one time may actually be driving some of your trade ideas that you have in your portfolio.

But for the majority of your trade ideas, you're going

going to be going through the trade idea generation process at the micro level and going through

the quantitative and qualitative dashboard. And you can see here now on the right hand

side, we filled out at this stage all of our qualitative metrics. So we've added our earnings

call transcripts, our management track record, the board of directors assessment,

insider stock and stock option ownership assessment, and the transaction history,

and the lay of the land in terms of analyst estimates, the range and the ratings.

And our essential ingredient to define a trade idea catalysts.

So in the majority of cases in terms of trade idea generation, you are going to be generating

ideas utilizing the bottom-up micro-assessment, going through the quantitative and qualitative processes. So identification via quantitative with supporting evidence at the sector level and drilling down to find, and optimally, on repeat, fill out the trade idea template.

So go to the downloads area of this video, download the Word document, the trade idea template.

We've saved this as a Word document, so you can actually use it as a template and you can actually

delete areas of information within the Word document and replace this obviously

with new data therefore new ideas and you'll see that there's various different

areas of the trade idea template which when you look at each of those areas,

you will realize that each of those areas is a part of the trade idea generation process.

And what we're going to do here is run through an example for you so you understand how to use it properly.

So the example that we're going to run through is with the

company or stock called Zendesk. And we're going to start with the first stage, which is the

quantitative analysis. And we're going to look at the data as a case study of what this would have

looked like in May 2020. So imagine you've been through your spreadsheet work,

the quantitative work at this stage, and now you're moving that data over to the Word document,

the trade idea generation template. So you can see here for

or Zendesk, the fields we have in the Word document.

We have the stock price, market cap, earnings per share estimates,

and reported earnings per share.

We have earnings growth, price earnings ratio, peg ratio.

We also have sales in millions of dollars, sales growth percentage,

so sales growth, sales multiple,

and we have net income. What we also denote here in the first part of our template is the shares

outstanding at the time. So what are we actually trying to achieve in this first part of the trade idea generation template?

Well, in this part of the template, what we're aiming to do is we're aiming to get the numbers right

and to arrive at sensible and reasonable conclusions in terms of price target assumptions.

Now, you'll notice a few things in the table that are worth talking about here

where you see the letter E denoted.

These are forward-looking estimates, numbers based off forward-looking estimates

that are important to us that we denote in terms of moving forwards

for our expectations of the stock price.

Also, for stock prices in the table before or previous to 2020, we have taken the stock price

at the end of each year and just rounded to the nearest dollar. So the thing to bear in mind here as you go through these processes is that this is obviously not an exact science.

We just need to make our template and our quantitative as accurate as possible and make reasonable assumptions so we can derive an expected

stock price move and the parameters that we're operating in moving forward.

Now, you'll notice also that there's some commentary under the table in the trade idea

generation template,

some commentary on the annual quantitative analysis here.

So when you're going through your processes,

this part of the template is intended for you to literally spell out

what type of trade this is.

And also to have your price targets listed in this area because your price targets are inferred by the quantitative data, so the growth numbers and the valuation. So if we look at the

basic commentary around Zendesk here underneath the table.

When you were doing your quantitative work at the time,

you will have concluded that Zendesk is much more of a revenue growth story

rather than an earnings growth story.

So you will have covered this in this section of the trade idea generation template,

obviously to remind yourself of the actual situation in the stock, what type of trade that it is.

So in 2019, we know that Zendesk booked a gap loss and a non-gap profit.

gap loss and a non-gap profit. So it's a much more of a revenue growth story. In 2019, the gap loss was at minus $169.7 million and a non-gap profit they booked as $36.8 million. And the difference was due to a share-based compensation package or scheme,

and it was related to expenses to do with that.

So we are operating here utilizing the non-GAAP profit numbers

because we are working off a positive EPS number. Now we're not going

to go into all the accounting minutia here in what situations you should be

looking at gap and non-gap numbers. That's additional work that you'll have to

do outside the scope of the PTM video series. Now you can see here in the comments section we have reference to our

end of the financial year 2020 price targets and what we're doing here is using the same PE moving

forward as 2019. So we're assuming that the market pays roughly the same

multiple for earnings going forward so one thing we do to get a price target is

we look at the 2020 EPS number versus the 2019 EPS number and we work out the difference between the two, so the percentage difference,

which of course is earnings growth for 2020 versus 2019, and we work out the earnings growth

number as a multiple, which is 1.8. So all we're doing here in reality is basically saying that if the stock actually delivers on 80% earnings growth, if we keep the multiple, the P-E ratio constant and valuation constant,

then the stock price is likely to be up around a similar amount, so up 80%.

So the stock price moves from $76 to $136.

And instead of getting carried away here and calling this a totally realistic expectation,

what we do is we call this our upper bound.

So our upper bound price target is basically a very bullish expectation.

Now, as we have this 2020 price target, our $136.80 to be specific, as our upper bound,

we can use that number to multiply by the shares outstanding to get an

inferred market capitalization for the upper bound at the end of 2020. And this comes in at $15.1

billion. And then we can divide that number by the sales estimate of the market of $1.1 billion.

And that gives us an upper bound sales multiple for the end of 2020 at 13.74.

Now, as we know in this situation, Zendesk is more of a revenue growth story.

Zendesk is more of a revenue growth story.

So we can utilize sales numbers and sales multiples to come up with a lower bound price target.

So if we utilize the consensus mean sales estimate from Analyst for 2020, which is $1.1 billion. We can multiply this by the sales multiple of 2019,

10.31, keeping that constant into 2020, which gives us an inferred market cap of $11.341,000,000 at the end of 2020. And then we can divide by shares outstanding to get to a lower bound price target of $102.60

based on our sales estimates and sales multiples.

So what we've done here is we've achieved an upper bound

bullish price target based on forward-looking earnings and constant valuation. And we've also

achieved a lower bound price target, a much more realistic price target based on sales and sales multiples staying constant.

Now, just as a side note here, as mentioned earlier, we're not going to delve into the details of commenting on GAAP and non-GAAP.

This is a situational scenario.

scenario to Zendesk. And this is where discretionary interpretation of each individual situation

occurs. But it should be pretty obvious in this situation with Zendesk, for example,

that the market is choosing to focus on the revenue growth story and the evidence is in the valuation that the market is willing to pay for the revenue growth

and the maturation or maturing of a company going from a loss-making operation at the earnings level