Okay, so let's get stuck in to video number nine, our next leading indicator.

So our fifth leading indicator, the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index, or the

UMCSI. So yes, we are going to be having a look now at consumers and a survey in the consumer

sector of the economy. So recap of leading indicators covered so far. We've got our government

bond markets leading indicators, real interest rates and the yield curve. We've got our corporate

bond market leading indicators, our investment grade with high yield or junk spreads over

the 10 year. We've got our M2 money supply accessory. We've got our stock market volatility,

the VIX, the S&P 500 VIX from the IPLT video series. And we've got our surveys.

And so far, we have covered the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business.

And we've covered the ISM Non-Manufacturing Report on Business.

Now, we are going to add in the US consumer

by looking at the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index.

So what exactly is the UMCSI?

What is it?

Well, it's a monthly survey that gauges the level of consumer sentiment in the U.S. economy.

So sentiment as to whether consumers as a whole in the U.S. economy are either bullish or bearish on their future.

So if consumer sentiment is high, so consumers in the U.S. are bullish on their future, consumers are likely to be spending more in the future, causing the economy to expand.

So there's more consumption and potentially less saving.

If consumer sentiment is low, so bearish on the future.

So consumers in the US are looking at their future

and they're bearish on their consumer sentiment for the future.

What's going to happen? Consumers will likely spend less in the future, causing the economy

to contract. So we get less consumption and people tightening their belts and saving more.

and saving more. Now, the consumer, we calculate the size of the consumer in the US in terms of the amount of consumer spending that takes place in the economy. And consumer spending makes up

67% of the US economy. And if you recall, there's not many entities that make up an economy.

It's just businesses, consumers, and government. And businesses and consumers are in the private

sector, and government is in the public sector. So if we're looking at consumer spending making up

67% of the economy, the remainder is business and government spending.

So the consumer, US consumer spending, makes up the majority of spending of those entities

in the United States. So it obviously stands to reason that as traders and portfolio managers,

gauging consumer sentiment in the United States is extremely important as a leading indicator to the future of the economy.

So GDP growth.

Now, before we get into the details of the UMCSI, it's probably prudent at this stage to have a quick lesson on some economic theory to understand the dynamics of consumers.

So what we're going to have a look at first is something called the paradox of thrift,

which was popularized by the famous economist John Maynard Keynes.

And it's based on the notion, which we outlined briefly on the previous slide, whereby individuals

seek to cut their consumption during periods of economic contraction and increase their savings. So tightening their belt overall, which in turn will lead to further

contraction. So think about this. When there's an economic downturn, if all that consumers are reading

in the media are headlines like, get ready for the recession, what's their natural tendency going to be?

ready for the recession. What's their natural tendency going to be? Their natural tendency is going to be to cut consumption, to save and hoard cash and resources. And what does that

lead to in the future? Well, it causes a steeper and faster contraction in the economy, in GDP,

contraction in the economy, in GDP, so GDP growth, because of the sudden fall in consumer demand,

which leads to a longer and deeper period of contraction. So the paradox occurs because the only way really for an economy to get itself out of contraction is to obviously expand. And the only way, really, for an economy to get itself out of contraction is to obviously expand.

And the only way to expand is to actually spend.

So the spending causes an increase in aggregate demand, which generates

price inflation, and then GDP growth. However, when individual consumers expect worse economic

conditions in the future, their sentiment of the future is negative. And instead of doing what's

required, which is to spend in order to expand, what do they do in reality? They do the opposite,

and they save, and they cut consumer spending.

And collectively, if we take all consumers in an economy, if they're all making this decision at an individual level,

and then we look at all consumers in the economy, by not spending collectively, consumers are essentially causing their own economic situation or living standards to be even worse in the future.

So this is the paradox of thrift.

So being thrifty in a economic downturn because all the consumers, it's in their best interests for the economy to expand. However, their actions

are the opposite of what's good for them. Okay. Now, if we think of this in reverse,

so we think of the paradox of thrift in reverse. Well, it's a little far-fetched to say that it's in the best interests when an economy is expanding that consumers would

want. So it's in their best interests they would want an economy to contract. So think about it.

If an economy is expanding for a long period of time, why would consumers want the economy to contract? It's not in their best interest.

So when we look at the paradox of thrift in reverse, there's an issue here. Because as far as consumers

and long-term investors in the stock market are concerned, let's ask ourselves this question.

market are concerned, let's ask ourselves this question. Is it bad to always be expanding and benefiting from higher living standards? Well, of course not. Basically, for living standards

and your own individual economic condition as a consumer,raction is bad and expansion is good.

So the behavior of consumers in times of thrift,

so during times of contraction,

is not consistent with consumer behavior

in times of expansion during, for lack of a better word,

during times of extravagance.

Okay.

So if we apply the same logic to an economy that's expanding a lot for a long period of

time, okay.

If we wanted to make them consistent, we would be stating that consumers should be spending less and saving more in order to better their own living standards or economic situation.

But this would be counterintuitive, because if all consumers did this, it would cause them to all have worse living standards. Why? Because overall economic

growth in the economy would go down. And that's bad for everybody, everybody's living standards

and economic situation individually. So when consumer sentiment is high, and we're in times of extravagance, it can be argued that consumers are actually behaving rationally.

So they are spending more and more and continually causing their own living standards or economic situation to get better and better.

to get better and better. And when consumer sentiment is low, it can obviously be argued that consumers are behaving irrationally. So they are cautious, they are hoarding,

they are saving. And what ends up happening? They cause their own living standards or economic situation to get worse and worse.

What they should be doing is spending.

So this is an interesting dynamic of consumer behavior to understand as we lead in to doing work on the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index. It's just good background

information in terms of economic understanding of how consumers behave. We will read into our numbers

in a lot better understanding if we understand how consumers behave in periods of thrift or contraction and periods of expansion

and extravagance.

Now, something else to understand when we're thinking about consumers.

It's not a consumer behavior or, if you like, consumer psychology variable or factor to consider.

This is a capacity issue.

We do have finite resources,

and consumers have finite parameters.

One limiting factor is just the purchase of products.

A consumer can only have at any one time so many cars,

washing machines, refrigerators, handheld devices, phones,

etc., etc. This is a finite constraint for the consumer

on consumers. So when we think about that in terms of extravagance, there is a cycle to this.

There is a cycle where consumers get constrained and then there's nothing left to consume.

Logically and in theory, that can be the case. Another limiting factor, and probably much more important from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective,

is that consumers in their behaviors, so consumer spending and savings rates,

are also a function of the money supply and the price of money, so real interest rates,

both of which can be decreased and increased by the Fed

when they're utilizing conventional and unconventional means

to hit their dual mandate.

So this is a real, everyday parameter that's finite in the economy.

Consumer spending has peaks and troughs like business activity.

So when we looked at the ISM and the NMI, they move in tandem and literally taking together, so when we take together consumer spending and business

activity, they make up the business cycle. So if you recall from video four, when we looked at real

interest rates in the yield curve, you may want to go back and have a look at this slide. I've put

it on the screen there for you to remind you. There's cycles to this

based on interest rates, okay, based on real rates and the money supply. Money becomes cheap

and money becomes expensive and consumer spending responds to this parameter. And so do businesses. So businesses and consumers expand and contract together. Business investment and consumer spending patterns or behaviors are to a large extent a function of real rates and the money supply.

the money supply. So if you recall, just looking at the screenshot of the slide from video four there, when money becomes cheap, governments, companies, and individuals, so consumers,

borrow more of it. We get higher growth prospects, consumption. So from consumers,

we get higher consumption and investment from businesses.

How does that lead into the equity markets? Well, we get higher equity valuation and earnings

from companies. So we get higher corporate earnings and higher equity market valuation.

valuation. And then we come to the end of the cycle and money becomes more expensive.

And what happens then? Governments, companies and individuals borrow less. We get lower growth

prospects or perhaps contraction. We get less consumption and investment. We get lower equity

valuation and earnings. And then we start the cycle again. Money starts to become cheap. So this is how

consumers fit in to the overall picture. Businesses and consumers expand and contract together.

And quarterly and annual gross domestic product numbers, so the GDP prints, lag the S&P 500's price and earnings

and valuation, which are a function of consumer spending patterns and behaviors and business

investment. So when we're considering consumers in the economy, we not only have to understand consumer behavior and consumer psychology, if you like, with the paradox of thrift and how the opposite doesn't line up, doesn't make logical sense.

doesn't line up, doesn't make logical sense. We also have to consider how everything is linked together and how consumers face a finite set of variables

or parameters. So real interest rates and the money supply. So we don't just look at consumers in absolute terms. We have

to consider consumer behavior in the context of everything else that is happening in the economy.

Therefore, from a trader and portfolio manager perspective, everything that's happening with the rest of our leading indicators,

especially what's happening in the money markets and with businesses.

So both in the manufacturing and services,

so non-manufacturing sectors of the economy.

Now, there are critics of the paradox of thrift.

Quick reminder of what we've laid out so far in terms of consumer behavior.

In terms of rational behavior, where there's no paradox,

this is during periods of expansion,

so periods of extravagance.

If consumer sentiment is high, so they are bullish on the future, consumers will spend

more in the future, causing the economy to change.

to expand more. So in this period, what's the consumer behaving like? There's more consumption,

less savings, so possibly not getting richer. But during these periods of expansion,

they are associated with higher innovation in the economy, more products, and higher

living standards. So consumers are buying more products to

improve their living standards. What about the paradox of thrift? So the

irrational behavior. Well, if consumer sentiment is low, so they're bearish on the

future, consumers spend less in the future. This causes the economy to contract.

So less consumption and more savings.

So they're definitely not getting richer during this time.

There's less innovation.

They're consuming less products and their living standards are staying the same or perhaps getting worse.

Now, we looked on the previous slide at the finite dynamics, the limiting factors that affect

consumer behavior. And how does this all link together? Well, through the economic cycle,

all linked together? Well, through the economic cycle, supposedly during times of extravagance, interest rates will go higher. Real interest rates will go higher. And consumers are supposed to,

in theory, respond in their behavior by increasing their savings rate and decreasing their consumption.

But in reality, that doesn't happen.

Periods of extravagance tend to last a lot longer than expected.

And consumers tend to consume even more.

And when consumers do this, there's actually no paradox.

This is actually rational behavior because continued economic growth is just good for everybody.

It's better for everybody's living standards.

And what happens in periods of contraction?

Well, we have interest rates falling, so lower real rates.

And how do consumers respond to that?

Well, they respond irrationally. They respond paradoxically via the mechanism

of the economic theory of the paradox of thrift.

This occurs by people saving more

as interest rates are falling

and consuming less as well at the same time.

So the paradox is that at this part of the cycle,

consumers should be spending their way out of the contraction,

but they are not.

They are tightening their belts.

They are hoarding cash, hoarding resources, and consuming less.

They are hoarding cash, hoarding resources, and consuming less.

So the critics of Keynes' theory of the paradox of thrift, they criticize it on the grounds that an increase in savings from consumers allows banks to lend more money via an increase in bank reserves through the fractional reserve banking system. So the idea is that as long as the money supply is constant, the business cycle

should be self-correcting and shouldn't require any intervention in the market because market interest

rates should go down and lead to a natural increase in lending from the banks and therefore

spending from consumers at some point. Now, this is all good in theory to say that the economy will be self-correcting.

If we think about this, then the opposite must hold true in theory.

If we have constant money supply growth when savings rates are lower and consumption is high during expansionary periods,

so in those times of extravagance,

then naturally market interest rates should go higher or will go higher.

And then that will naturally lead to a decrease in lending

and therefore consumer spending.

Unfortunately, guys, the world really isn't that simple. It's messy,

and there's no ultimate truth or rulebook as to what should be occurring or what happens

at any one time or in any particular business cycle. It obviously can be different every time.

But from a trader's and portfolio portfolio managers perspective, if we're

going to understand consumer sentiment in the US and use it as a leading

indicator, we have to understand these dynamics of consumers. We have to

understand the business cycle that is connected, that consumer behavior is connected to the

other parameters of the economy.

So businesses, for example, and real interest rates and the money supply, we have to understand

that.

So whenever we look at the consumer sentiment index in the United States, we have to understand the consumer behavior in the context of all other indicators and what else is going on in the economy.

We also have to understand that there could be long periods of irrational consumer behavior and understand why that is

happening. It's probably occurring due to the paradox of thrift. We also have to understand

that there could be very short periods of irrational behavior. Again, paradox of thrift.

We have to understand that something could occur that makes consumers begin spending again

in times of economic contraction.

We also have to understand the dynamic of the rational behavior

that in periods of expansion,

there could be extremely long times of rational behavior

from consumers where they're spending a lot longer than people expect.

So we have to take all of this into context, guys. We have to understand consumer behavior

and consumer psychology. And we have to understand the limiting factors on consumers.

And from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective, understand the other

parameters in the economy and how consumers are linked to the other areas of the economy

and their consumer behavior and how it's all linked together.

This way, in the future, when we pull up the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index, and we see the number, and we look at the chart, and we look at where we've come from, and where we are now, and where we might be going, we get a much better understanding when we think of the U.S. consumer and U.S. consumer sentiment in the context of how consumers behave and how it fits in to the rest of the economy and the dynamics that are playing out.

Because at any one time, things will be different relative to another time in the business cycle or in previous business cycles.

So we have to understand the context and keep asking ourselves the questions.

Why are consumers behaving in this way?

What does it mean in terms of the business cycle?

What does it mean in terms of the context

of real interest rates and the money supply

and money market dynamics?

What does it mean in the context of current Fed policy?

And we're going to get a much clearer picture

if we ask ourselves those questions

at any one moment in time.

So the US Consumer Sentiment Institute

index itself, the UMCSI, the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index. As a trader

or portfolio manager, how do we actually use it? Well, what we do know is that consumer sentiment

historically does have peaks and troughs. It cycles. And when we use it in conjunction with other macroeconomic indicators,

we can work out at any one given time what is going on with the US consumer and the economy.

And therefore, we have a great indicator for predicting GDP growth and for calling the direction of the S&P 500 or the US stock market

and likely stock market returns and Fed policy. And this, like our other leading indicators that

we've looked at so far, dictates to us the likely directional bias that we're going to have.

So a long bias, bullish, a short bias, bearish, or a neutral bias, so agnostic bias, in our portfolios as traders.

Now, consumer spending is 67% of the U.S. economy, as we mentioned previously.

Consumer spending is 67% of the US economy, as we mentioned previously.

And it is historically highly predictive of GDP growth in the future.

It's also very predictive of stock market direction and potential stock market returns and likely Fed policy.

So, guys, let's have a look now at the detail of the UMCSI. Let's have a look at the survey design. So the way the survey is put together each month,

basically the University of Michigan Consumer Research Center conducts a telephone survey asking 500, yes, only 500 consumers, a series of questions on their personal finances and their opinions on business conditions. So the way it's broken up, the way it's split up,

it's split into two component areas that have an equal 50% weighting given to each area.

So we have the Aggregate Consumer Sentiment Index, which is the ICS. And that is made up of two areas with an equal

50% weighting. That's the Index of Current Conditions, the ICC, and the Index of Consumer

Expectations, the ICE. Now, this is

This is what it looks like on the surface level, but as always, as traders and portfolio

managers, we do have to dig a little deeper to try and find out which are the most useful

areas for us in predicting future GDP growth and stock market direction.

So let's have a look at how this is broken down properly. We mentioned the two areas,

the current conditions index and the consumer expectations index, making up the index overall,

the aggregate index of consumer sentiment. And the way that's split up, we have the five questions and current conditions is questions number one and five.

And the expectations index, so for consumer expectations, that relates to questions two, three and four.

So let's first have a look at current conditions, so one and five.

current conditions, so one and five. Firstly, the 500 consumers are asked, we are interested in how people are getting along financially these days. Would you say that you and your family are better

off or worse off financially than you were a year ago? That's the first question.

Question number five, about the big things people buy for their homes,

such as furniture, a refrigerator, stove, television, and things like that.

Generally speaking, do you think now is a good or bad time

for people to buy major household items?

So these are the two questions that make up the current conditions index.

They're basically asking the consumers, So these are the two questions that make up the current conditions index.

They're basically asking the consumers, are you better off or worse off financially than a year ago?

And are you going to be spending money on major household items?

So they are basically being surveyed or tested, if you like, on their view of their current financial situation which obviously measures current sentiment now let's have a look at expectations so looking

into the future so we're looking at questions two three and four so question

two looking ahead do you think that's a year now, you and your family will be better off financially or worse off or just about the same as now?

Question three, turning to business conditions in the country as a whole.

Do you think that during the next 12 months we'll have good times financially or bad times or what?

Question four, looking ahead.

bad times or what? Question four, looking ahead. Which would you say is more likely? That in the country as a whole, we'll have continuous good times during the next five years or so,

or that we will have periods of widespread unemployment or depression or what?

So it's pretty obvious here what consumers are being surveyed on, what they're being tested on, is their expectations of the future.

If they are bullish, bearish or neutral of their own consumer expectations, their own consumer sentiment of the future.

of the future. Now, in terms of the data, you can go to the downloads area and you can look at the UMCSI file where we have the entire history data set of the University of Michigan Consumer

Sentiment Index and the components, the current conditions and the expectations data.

And what you'll also see is changes in the component indexes.

So with current conditions and expectations, the changes on a month-by-month basis in terms of points.

And you'll also see that for the aggregate index as well.

You'll find as well in the spreadsheets

that we've taken the data

and created a whole bunch of visuals,

so charts from the data.

If we look here, the main one is the headline aggregate UMCSI

with all data going back to 1978.

So the visual is there in the downloads area.

And next one, you'll see that we have

the all-time aggregate index of the UMCSI

with the changes month-on-month on the chart as well.

We also do this for both the current conditions and expectations index.

So you'll see that the same visuals and same analysis for the all time series and for the changes month on month

are there for both the current conditions and the expectations index as well.

Now, as we've done in previous videos where we've looked at certain times in the past to look at how

certain leading indicators were behaving at certain periods of time. We can do that,

obviously, as well for the UMCSI. So if we look at the period August 18 to August 19,

that was the period that we've looked at in previous videos.

We can see at the headline level of the UMCSI

that we didn't really get a big drop in consumer sentiment

at the aggregate level.

during that time. So if we look at the data from August 18 to August 19, you can see the move,

96.2 down to 89.8. But in July 19, the aggregate index was 98.4. So there's only really two moves during that period at the aggregate level where the index fell by a decent amount of points.

That's January 19 and August 19.

But we can look at the component parts and see what that's driven by. If we look at the current conditions index, the current conditions index stays above 100

the entire time and is extremely strong.

But the expectations index is actually what's driving the aggregate fall.

So we can see in January 2019, a fall down in expectations.

That was a move in conjunction with current conditions.

But you can see the moves down overall,

and the big move down in August 2019

from expectations of 10.6 points.

So in August 2019, the expectations index is 79.9, and the

current conditions index is 105.3, leaving the aggregate index at 89.8.

So what's interesting during this period is that the aggregate level, so at the aggregate index, the way we would read this

is that there wasn't a consumer recession, for want of a better word, during this period,

August 18 to August 19. However, there was a very big concern over consumer expectations. There was no current

concern, i.e. what consumers were currently experiencing in the economy in terms of their

sentiment, but their expectations of the future were dwindling. And when we put this in a bigger context, when we think about previous videos in the video series, and when we looked at this period, if you recall, we determined that during this period, it was essentially down to a manufacturing slowdown, not a services slowdown. And if we put this into context now,

we can see that there was no consumer slowdown

at the aggregate level

and the current conditions of consumer sentiment.

It was their expectation of the future,

the consumer sentiment,

consumer was getting tired in the US in 2019.

And they were signaling that they were going to spend less via their own consumer sentiment and expectations in the future.

So this is pretty interesting because we know that the Fed cut rates in July, September and October.

So this is how you can see it all starts to link together.

And if we look further down in the data,

when we look at the second half of 2019,

we can see the aggregate level by the end of the year

pretty much gets back up to 100.

In December 2019, we're looking at a reading of 99.3.

And you can see a decent recovery in expectations

and definitely a strong recovery in current conditions.

If we look further into the COVID era,

so if we look into the first half of 2020,

we can see a total collapse of expectations

in the spring of 2020, where we go from above 90 at the beginning of 2020. And we look at the data

a few months later, we can see when the COVID lows go in, which is March 2020,

we can see when the COVID lows go in, which is March 2020, we can see expectations of 79.7.

And we can see in May 2020, expectations hitting a low of 65.9. And the expectations index really struggled to get moving for the rest of 2020. Also, the current conditions index really struggled as well

for most of 2020 after getting hit due to the COVID economic shutdown.

And just bear in mind, the Fed actions came in March, April, May, June.

And the effect that it had on consumers wasn't actually as big as expected.

And it took a long time for consumers to start to come back.

What you're actually seeing there when we look at the 2019 period,

there when we look at the 2019 period and we look at it compared to the 2020 COVID economic lockdown period, you're looking now at the period of extended extravagance versus the

period of the paradox of thrift.

We can also have a look at the global financial crisis. During that time, what was going on

with consumers? Well, the UMCSI has peaks and drops like other leading indicators. And

We had peak conditions for consumers. You'll see that in the data in the spreadsheet in January 2007, with a reading at the aggregate level of 96.3 in February 2009. So you can see that's a full two years from Jan 07, where we had a gradual

decline from peak throughout 2007 and then through 2008 to February 09, where we had the trough. So that's a full two years. That's obviously

a pretty long period of time for consumption to be declining. So it gives you a good perspective

and understanding of how the consumer behaves sometimes in the US. Coming out of the consumer trop as well,

you can see if we look on the right hand side,

we want to know here,

how long did it take for the US consumer to actually recover?

Well, we know that the Fed was obviously very, very active during that time.

They had quantitative easing programs in place.

They also had conventional means.

So they lowered interest rates extremely aggressively during the financial crisis.

But coming out of the financial crisis, there was non-conventional monetary policy

of quantitative easing.

So they'd already had one quantitative easing program,

and they implemented a second one,

which didn't actually finish until June 29th, 2012.

And when we look at the US consumer data,

2012. And when we look at the US consumer data, the Fed's huge, unprecedented actions at that time, it took a long time for those actions to actually have an effect on the US

consumer and the US consumer recovery. The US consumer didn't really recover until 2012. So if you look at the

data there, you can see, for example, the data going back into the 70s consistently in the first but not getting above 80 until the second half of 2012.

So, as you can see, this is a very long period of time

where the UMCSI at an aggregate level peaked immediately.

in January 2007.

And then even after the massive unprecedented Fed policy and actions during and out of the

financial crisis, the consumer only really tepidly recovered by the second half of 2012.

So five years and the US consumer didn't even get back to the level where it was in January 2007, even by the second half of 2012, which, when you think about it, is obviously a very long time.

And what you're experiencing here, again, is the, if you like, irrational behavior of consumers

with the paradox of thrift.

If everybody went out and started spending their way out of this crisis, it might have

been over a lot quicker.

And the Fed may have needed to take less action throughout the following decade.

But you can see what their behavior was coming out of the global financial crisis.

They were obviously tightening their belts and very, very cautious about their spending

and nowhere near as extravagant with their spending coming out of the global financial crisis

as they were going into it.

So you can see by looking at the data,

these periods of thrift can last a very long time.

And also, if you look at periods of extravagance,

periods of expansion,

those periods can last a lot longer than expected as well.

But how do we actually use the UMCSI as traders and portfolio managers?

Well, unlike our business indicators, the ISM Manufacturing Index and the Non-manufacturing index. The UMCSI doesn't have a defined level

that signifies future expansion and contraction

in the US economy.

You'll notice on our charts, what we've done is,

is we put a simple trend line average

of the aggregate UMCSI, and we correlated this with long-term US GDP growth.

So the way we use it as traders and portfolio managers is we look at the UMCSI as a kind of

zonal guide for general levels of economic growth

and as a directional guide in conjunction

with the Expectations Index.

So we look at the level of the UMCSI as a guide to basically

help us predict the direction and a certain level of GDP growth around certain levels or certain

gates. So if at any one time we're looking at the UMCSI and we see multiple readings above 80,

well, we know that we have bullish consumers above this level. We should be expecting, based on historical data, that

annualized GDP growth is going to be 2% or higher. If we have readings between 70 and 80,

we kind of have, based on historical sentiment, benign consumers. We should expect when we have

readings between 70 and 80 for annualized GDP growth to be somewhere between 0 and 2%.

And if we have readings that are low, so readings between 55 and 70, based on

historical data, we have bearish consumers.

We should be expecting annualized GDP growth to be in a very wide range of negative 5% to plus 1%, but more likely to be zero to negative. Now, as mentioned previously, the UMCSI, like other leading indicators, does have

peaks and troughs. And essentially, peaks are where the consumer in the US is at capacity. And based

on historical probability, sentiment at some point is more likely to fall. However, when we're looking at it

at a certain period in time, at any one moment in time, we can't say exactly how long these conditions

will continue because every cycle is different and we have to consider the other factors. So we have

to consider the other factors that we looked at earlier of consumer behavior and psychology,

and also the other leading indicators, especially the money market dynamics.

The troughs are basically where consumers in the U.S. have gotten, via the paradox of thrift, too bearish and miserable.

And they now have capacity for spending.

So they can go out and begin buying discretionary items instead of just necessities.

But again, like the peaks, every cycle is different.

Like the peaks, every cycle is different, and we can't say exactly how long this period

of bearish consumer sentiment or thriftiness is going to last.

And again, we have to use it in conjunction with everything else

else that's going on in the other leading indicators at any one moment in time.

But let's have a look at the chart of the data where we compare the UM-CSI aggregate

versus real GDP growth.

So we have the UM-CSI on the right-hand side, and we have real GDP growth on the left-hand

side.

The blue line on the chart is the UMCSI reading.

The green lines are the bars for the level of GDP growth

that's reported quarterly.

And the red line is a long-term average growth rate of US annualized GDP.

So you can see when we look at moments in history where we've had multiple readings above the 80 level,

this is generally correlated with GDP growth of 2% or above. Then when we have

multiple readings between 70 and 80, we're looking at benign consumers. And this generally correlates anything between 0% and 2%.

And then if we have multiple readings of between 55% and 70%,

we tend to get growth between -5% and 1%.

So this is looking back across the whole data set

and looking at a zonal approach to the UMCSI

versus predicting direction and size of GDP growth.

Now, something we've also done in the downloads area

is look at the UMCSI versus S&P 500 direction and year-on-year percentage returns.

And what you can see by looking at the data set and looking at this visually,

what you can see is that when we have multiple readings throughout the data set above 80. This is generally very obviously associated

with positive direction in the stock market

and very good percentage returns annually in the S&P 500.

In our next zone, when we look at the 70 to 80 level, we still get, when you look through the data set, when we have benign consumers, positive stock market returns.

So in terms of direction, positive and decent to good returns on a year on year basis.

basis in the stock market. Where the problems occur for the stock market is when we have multiple

readings below 70 across the data set that is generally associated with either very weak stock

market positive returns, flat or negative to very negative returns on a year-on-year basis for the S&P 500.

negative returns on a year-on-year basis for the S&P 500. So when we think about this in terms of a zonal approach and think about GDP direction, the percentage

of GDP growth and also the direction of the S&P 500 and the percentage return in the S&P 500,

when we're using the UMCSI and looking at it as a zonal approach,

when we are above 70 and certainly above 80,

we should be expecting GDP growth in the positive direction.

And when it's above 80, certainly strong GDP growth in the positive direction.

And when it's above 80, certainly strong GDP growth.

And we should be expecting benign to bullish consumers.

And we should be expecting a positive stock market direction

and a strong to decent stock market percentage return year on year.

Where we get worried as traders and portfolio managers is when we get moves in the UMCSI

where it's going from peak and maybe from peak fairly aggressively.

and maybe from peak fairly aggressively.

And the US consumer is getting more and more bearish in their own sentiment.

And we start looking like we're going to go below 70, or we do go below 70 and we get a slowdown, a sharp slowdown in GDP growth and negative stock market

returns for the year that follow. However, again, as we've mentioned multiple times in

the video series, the Fed is watching this stuff too, and they could respond. So we have

to be careful with our approach and we have to look at this in the context of all other leading indicators and Fed policy. So what's

going on at the moment in time that we're looking at all of these

variables in the economy. Now so far we've only looked at the aggregate index.

I did mention earlier we've done the same analysis in the spreadsheets for the expectations and current conditions index,

which are the components that are driving the aggregate.

And as traders and portfolio managers, we have to look at

under the hood and look at the most useful stuff for us in really understanding what's

going on with a particular leading indicator at any one moment in time.

So we can also pinpoint a long-term average level on both the index of consumer expectations

and the index of current conditions. What we have to do is analyze the history of the aggregate UMCSI peaks and drops

and the peaks and drops of the expectations and current conditions indices.

What you should also be doing is analyzing the lengths of time that US consumer sentiment remains at or near

peaks and troughs. Now, out of the two components of the UMCSI, what do we think is the more

important one? What consumers are saying about their future expectations or about their current conditions.

Yes, you've guessed it.

For traders and portfolio managers, it's all about the future.

So the expectations index is by far the most important part of the UMCSI. It is seen by the market as the leading indicator

to the UMCSI aggregate level itself

and S&P 500 direction returns and GDP growth direction

and the level of GDP growth.

The most important thing for us as traders

and portfolio managers, when we're analyzing the UMCSI, when it comes out, the report comes out every month, is the expectations index and the monthly examples of the August 18 to August 19 period,

and we looked at the period going into the global financial crisis

and out of the global financial crisis.

Consumer sentiment is driven by consumer expectations,

consumer behavior, and consumer psychology.

So if overall sentiment is our primary objective as traders and PMs, taking a gauge of consumer sentiment in the United States, the most important thing in our objective here

is to understand whether consumers are bullish, bearish, or benign in their future expectations

of their sentiment.

And when we look at the expectations index and also even the aggregate index, we can take a zonal approach here for both expectations and aggregate level indices, we can look at areas where we're bullish, bearish and benign.

Okay.

So the 95 to 110 level in the expectations index and the aggregate index, when we look at the data throughout history,

tends to be the peak zone.

This is where we are very bullish

and we have a very strong bias

towards being long in our portfolio.

But we have to be aware that we could be potentially

at a turning point in the future for GDP growth rate.

Next is the trough zone, the other extreme. This is the 55 to 70 level in the expectations index

and the aggregate index. This area is the very bearish area. This is where we would be leaning towards a

short bias. But we again have to be aware and look at the context that we are in when we're

looking at other leading indicators. We have to be aware that we could be at a turning point

in the future for the GDP growth rate GDP growth rate and potential stock market direction.

Because we could, in this area, be suffering from the paradox of thrift.

Next is the 70 to 95 zone.

This is the area where if we have multiple readings, we interpret this as a benign to steady growth zone when we look across the data. but not overly bullish, mildly bullish with no major concerns or major expectation of future GDP growth rate. So we will maintain a long bias in the portfolio or lean towards that. Now you have to be

very careful here. There is obviously no rule book that says when you get readings at certain levels

in the UMCSI, that translates automatically into a portfolio bias and a certain level of GDP

growth rate and stock market annual returns. You have to use the UMCSI in the context with all

the other leading indicators that we've looked at so far and what we're going to look at in future

parts of the PTM video series. There's no rule book, guys. As retail traders, it's very, very easy

to fall into this trap where you think that there's

a rule book and if you tick a number of boxes, you're just going to make money.

It doesn't work like that.

Every business cycle is different.

It just so happens that when we look at the data and we look at the data set across the data set from 1978,

this is what's happened in the past,

where in a best average approach,

when you have various zones of the UMCSI,

your bias will have been towards a certain bias.

Does that mean it's a rule book?

No.

You have to take everything into context and make the decision based on not just this,

but all other leading indicators as well.

Now, we mentioned earlier that we did the same analysis to the data with the expectations index and the current conditions index as we did with the aggregate index data.

So go and have a look at that, have a look at the data, start looking at previous business cycles

and become a student of the UM-CSI

and understand what's going on with the data

in the spreadsheet.

Of course, every month you can go ahead

and update those spreadsheets yourself.

You just have to fill in the spreadsheet

with the latest

numbers for the aggregate level, the expectations index and the current

conditions index. And then of course you have to make an interpretation like every

other leading indicator of the level that the US consumer is at and what their

expectations are and what their current conditions are and what their expectations are

and what their current conditions are

and what it means in the bigger picture context.

And of course, what it means for your own expectations

of annualized GDP growth,

the direction of GDP growth plus the expected level and in addition the expected direction of

the stock market and the potential return annualized for the stock market. We've also

We've also added in a chart where you can look at the UMCSI aggregate in blue here,

and have a look at the expectations and current conditions index all on the same chart.

So go into the spreadsheet and have a look at all of the data and work on the data and the charts to understand the nuts and bolts of the U.S. consumer.

Now, there are other things that when we're looking at the U.S. consumer, we have to be aware of in terms of things in the bigger picture just to fill everything in at any one moment in time.

It's just good to be aware of these things that we're going to look at now because it

tells us for consumers in the United States, the capacity of the consumer.

of the consumer. So, if you recall from the causality of consumer behavior and spending patterns from earlier slides, we looked at consumer spending and savings rates being a function

of real interest rates and the money supply, which are obviously both manipulated and managed by the Federal Reserve.

The Fed is obviously very active in managing real interest rates and the money supply.

And this affects the way consumers behave, the way they spend and the way they save.

behave, the way they spend and the way they save.

And there's certain statistics we can look at in the U.S. economy to get an appreciation and understanding in the bigger picture of consumer capacity.

So something we would look at on a regular basis every quarter to understand the consumer capacity is US household debt to GDP.

So the level of household debt to gross domestic product expressed in percentage terms.

So what is household debt?

percentage terms. So what is household debt? Well, it's made up of mortgages, consumer loans,

credit card balances, and auto finance. And if you look at the chart on the left-hand side,

our data from trading economics is going back to the 1950s. And you can obviously see a steady rise in the level of household debt as a percentage of GDP all the way up to present day. And obviously it peaked around the mid 2000s before the final year.

crisis and where we are now at the time of recording is essentially if you look

at the right-hand side for a zoomed-in picture 76% of GDP so household debt is

76% of GDP in the United States at the time of recording so why would we look at

this on a regular basis well we, we just want to get an

appreciation and understanding as to whether there's actually capacity for consumers to

grow or be bullish in the future. So being at 76% and coming down from a level of almost close to 100% versus GDP,

there's obviously slack and capacity in the economy for this to occur.

So there's enough capacity for an increased debt load relative to GDP to occur.

to occur. But obviously a lot depends on interest rates and the cost of servicing any outstanding debt in the economy.

Something else we would look at on a regular basis to understand capacity issues is U.S. household debt service payments as a percentage of disposable personal income. And if you look at the chart coming from 1980 up until time of recording, you can see obviously

the percentage of US household debt service payments versus disposable personal income.

It's been up and down for that entire period.

And typically before 2010, it was between 10% and 13%.

But you can see, given the moves that we've

had in interest rates over the last decade,

from the time of recording, over the last decade,

you can see that this percentage of household debt service payments

relative to personal income has been dropping by quite a lot.

So what does that mean?

Well, servicing the debt relative to income has become a lot cheaper

for households in the United States.

So it means that there's obviously capacity to occur in terms of servicing debt and the total debt load.

So that gives consumers room to be bullish. Something else we would look at on a quarterly basis

is a household and nonprofit organization,

one to four family residential mortgage liability.

And we look at the total debt load here on a quarterly basis.

those mortgages. And if you look at the left-hand side in billions of dollars, you can see it's

above the 10,000 billion mark, which is 10 trillion. Does that mean there's no capacity left? Of course

not. This is just a dollar figure. So of course, more capacity can occur. But you can see the general trend since the 70s has been on a big rise.

We peaked in the financial crisis and it looks like the one to four family residential mortgage

liability is growing above the global financial crisis level.

So again, does this mean there's a capacity issue

if this thing goes up a lot higher?

Not necessarily.

As mentioned before on the previous slide,

it's the level of interest that is important here as well.

So it's the size of the debt load and the cost that households incur relative to their personal income

in servicing that debt load.

So we keep an eye on these things on a quarterly basis

and we just take note of them

and what it might mean for consumer capacity

in terms of household debt

and the cost of servicing that debt. And we put it into context with our other leading indicators

and we fill in the bigger picture and try to understand at any one moment in time what's

going on in the economy.

And of course, if you look at the chart here and compare it to the household debt charts on the previous slides,

and what have we got here?

We've got the 10-year yield adjusted for CPI,

so adjusted for inflation.

So we've got the real 10-year yield since 1980 and this obviously

if you look at the modern context gives you an idea of fed policy and what they're trying to achieve

here and think about it in the context of the previous slides and household debt.

So real interest rates have been coming down over the last 40 years and coming down from a level of

around 8% to modern day as negative. So yes, of course, there's a big question here in that over the bigger picture, is it necessary for this to happen because the debt load is so high that the Fed has to be in the market creating conditions of zero to negative real rates.

in order for households to service that debt.

And the big question is there capacity for further debt to be added to the US economy?

Well, we looked at the previous slides and it can be argued both ways.

But we just need to keep an eye on these numbers on a quarterly basis.

So the household debt numbers and, of course, real rates,

we need to be keeping an eye on them all the time.

And thinking about what that means in the context of consumer capacity,

consumer behavior and consumer capacity, consumer behavior, and consumer psychology, and also what the UMCSI is telling us.

So let's have a summary of the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index.

So we know that consumer spending is dominant. It makes up 67% of all spending in the United States.

So it's obviously very important for us to be on top of this as traders and portfolio managers.

How consumers feel about their current, so coincident, and expected future income affects GDP growth, which is lagging.

So it is a leading indicator.

And not just that, the UMCSI is a powerful leading indicator of US GDP growth and S&P 500 direction and potential returns.

So it's vitally important to us as professional traders, our portfolio

managers, for our portfolio buyers. Because consumer spending makes up such a

large part of all spending in the US, the US consumer drives US GDP growth and

global GDP growth and stock market returns in the US and the

rest of the world. How do we use it as professional traders? Well we use it as a

guide in conjunction with money market indicators and our other leading

indicators to predict trends and turning points in the business cycle and therefore getting our portfolio directional

bias. So net long or short or even neutral portfolio bias. And remember there is no defined levels

like the business activity indices like the ISM manufacturing and non-manufacturing indices where we have

the 50 level signifying above 50 expansion and below 50 contraction.

The UMCSI doesn't have that, we have to use it as a zonal guide and correlated

with GDP growth in those zones and stock market direction and returns to get a rough guide

of what to expect.

And we also have to be very careful in our understanding of consumer behavior and psychology

when looking at consumer sentiment. Periods of thrift, because of the paradox of thrift, can occur in small

windows of time, but they can also occur in very long windows of time as well. And we

shouldn't be surprised when that happens. Additionally, on the flip side, periods of

extravagance can occur for a much longer period of time as well.

So we have to be aware of that when we're thinking about peaks and troughs

and also the effect the UMCSI has on GDP growth going forward.

But because as well the UMCSI in measuring consumer sentiment and because it's so important in terms of consumer spending driving the all this mean? We have to ask ourselves the question as well,

is the Fed looking at this?

And is the Fed likely to engage

in some sort of policy response?

So by using the UMCSI in conjunction

with our money market leading indicators

and our other macroeconomic indicators,

we're going to have a very good understanding

of the US economy, money flows, and potential Fed policy.

So guys, we've now looked at, in terms of surveys,

we've looked at businesses,

so the ISM manufacturing and the ISM non-manufacturing.

And we've also looked at now consumers.

In the next video, we're going to be looking at the US construction industry.

But first, before we do that, let's go back to the desk for a brief chat.

Before we do that, let's go back to the desk for a brief chat.

Okay, so that was the U.S. consumer and the main consumer survey in the United States,

the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index, the UMCSI.

You can now see that we're starting to get to a stage in the video series

where we're building a very comprehensive macroeconomic dashboard. So we've got our money market indicators and we're building up our surveys. And as you saw,

in that video with the US consumer, we have to understand how consumers themselves actually think

and operate. So this actually in the video was a quick lesson in economic theory that you would

have gotten if you were actually completing at university an economics degree. Now, with our historic examples, you can see now as well that

when we actually marry up our surveys together and when we look at them in the context of the money

markets, you can get a very good picture of how the US economy is doing at any one moment in time. And I would encourage you,

all of you, to do this. Look at business cycle history and understand what is going on during

those periods of booms and busts, so periods of business cycle history in the US economy.

and busts, so periods of business cycle history in the US economy. Ultimately, what we're always trying to do here as traders is determine stock market direction and hence our portfolio bias.

If you study former business cycles, so business cycle history, and you learn how to interpret numbers during those times and in the context

of the economy at that moment in time, what happens? You just get better at interpretation

for the future. So you get better at calling your portfolio bias. Okay, so make sure you are on top of the UMCSI every month. Use the

downloadable spreadsheets that are downloadable in the downloads area next to the video. Use those

spreadsheets for all of your leading indicators and update them regularly. If you do this, you're going to have a very good idea

of what's going on and become very good at interpreting the numbers. You'll become competent

at calling stock market direction and portfolio direction. Okay, so we're going to move on to our

next leading indicator. We're going to move on to building

permits. Now, this is a very interesting leading indicator because it just tells us so much about

what's happening in many different parts of the economy. And as with every macro indicator that we

go through, we're going to go through an explanation

of how it works, obviously.

But we're also going to refer to business cycle history and examples of business cycle history.

And we're going to use examples of stocks and sectors as well.

So we'll do this in building permits.

Enjoy the video and I'll see you a bit later on in the video series.