qualitative processing phase.

Okay, so welcome back to the desk.

We're going to continue now with our second step

for qualitative processing.

And actually, this is our second and final step

in the qualitative processing phase.

So let's get stuck in. So just as a reminder,

in the first stage of our qualitative analysis processing, we engaged in the identification

of a particular company's key performance indicators or KPIs and what the management operating plan, the MOP, of that company was through inference of those KPIs.

Whenever you're going through the qualitative processing in any stock, you need to actually layer additional qualitative work on top of that.

And this breaks down into five main areas.

So we're going to be looking in this video at earnings call transcripts.

We're going to be looking at management track record.

We'll look at the board of directors of a company.

We're going to be looking at insider stock

and stock option ownership and also the trading of insider stock and stock options. And we're also

going to be looking at research analyst estimates and the analyst range and ratings for stocks.

range and ratings for stocks. So let's start with earnings called transcripts. It's a very important resource when going through the qualitative process for any stock. So once

you've gone through financial statements and company presentations and you've identified company KPIs. What you need to do now is tie up all of the loose ends around those KPIs.

So you can actually typically get a lot or all of the main KPIs from earnings call transcripts

if they're not available on the investor relations website.

This is always on a case-by-case basis,

and in a particular situation, a particular stock,

management may not be communicating those KPIs

to the market in written form,

but they may be communicating them verbally.

This is you tying up the loose ends by looking at

earnings called transcripts. So you have to double check them. So to make sure that there's no stone

left unturned, go straight to the earnings called transcripts next.

So what is an actual earnings call transcript?

Well, it's when management communicate their results on a conference call,

and they do this verbally to shareholders and the public on the day that the company releases their quarterly earnings report.

And these earnings calls are transcribed, and they are uploaded to the company website.

They're uploaded online and they are made publicly available.

Usually what you're going to see is you're going to see the head of investor relations hosting the conference call.

And both the CEO and the CFO will literally tell you what numbers to focus on. Now, of course, we have to

use a bit of common sense here and be a little bit cautious. Of course, earnings calls are scripted

and rehearsed. It's the information that management wants you to focus on. However, at this stage of our analysis, for our purposes

right now, it's simply to identify the KPIs that we haven't identified yet from

company presentations. The trick here, and to do it quickly and efficiently is to scan the earnings call transcript and just let

your eye zoom in on the numbers and pay less attention to all of the mumbo-jumbo and noise

in the rest of the transcript. So how do you actually go about doing this? Well, we've got an

example here. We're looking at Abercrombie & Fitch, ANF. We're looking at their KPIs and management operating plan. And this is where we're going to be doing further work using this example of ANF, Abercrombie & Fitch.

to do is use some common sense. You're going to get a great shortcut by just going to Google and typing in the stock or the stock code with the extension earnings call transcripts,

and you'll get a lot of search results and most probably the most recent ones right at the top

of the page on Google. There's obviously going to be multiple sources that document this information.

What we want you to focus on here is obviously the process. In years from now, the process will

still be the same. Sources may be different. But right now, we have a search result at the top of

the page where we can see on the top of the search

results on Google website seekingalpha.com and we just click through and we

take a look and what do we find when we click through yes we get a full history

of Abercrombie & Fitch quarterly earnings

and earnings call transcripts.

Not only that, but we also get the full presentation

released by the company that accompanies

the transcribed upload of the earnings call.

So here we have clicked through on the top result

and we get to the page where we have clicked through on the top result and we get to the page where we have the Abercromb not only that we can see other conference call

participants namely the research analysts at the various investment banks and as well both research

companies and brokerage companies what you will find is that the format of earnings calls, earnings conference calls across the market, across various stocks, follow pretty much the same format.

So the head of investor relations or a representative of investor relations will introduce the call and then the CEO and CFO will come on later.

and then the CEO and CFO will come on later.

And what do we see here?

We see Pam Quintiliano, who's from Investor Relations, introducing the call. And then, after the introduction, turning it over to the CEO, Fran Horowitz.

Now, what are we interested in?

We are obviously interested in identifying key performance indicators, KPIs from the earnings call transcripts.

We're looking for what's important from the language and where they are pointing us.

What direction are they pointing us in?

What numbers are they pointing us at that are important as business drivers behind

revenue and earnings? Well, what you will find in most cases, the vast, vast majority of cases,

is that the CEO will start pointing you in the direction of the KPIs that matter. So if we look at what Fran Horowitz starts talking about immediately,

what's Fran actually talking about?

Well, here's what she's saying.

So if we just look at the paragraph,

her opening paragraph where she starts talking about numbers

after the niceties are out the way

uh she says looking back on 2020 i am proud of our accomplishments and the positive change

that we drove okay that's great that's all uh mumbo jumbo so far there's

There's no numbers around that, but then she gets into the numbers that she wants to talk about immediately that are important.

So here's what she's saying.

Despite the difficult operating environment, yes, 2020 was the COVID year.

She's saying we grew digital penetration to 54% of revenue from 33% last year.

So using common sense, what does that tell us?

Digital penetration is obviously an important KPI to this company.

How do we know that?

Because literally the CEO is pointing to it immediately in the earnings conference call. It's the first number

that she mentions. So it has to be an important number. Additionally, in that paragraph, what she's

saying, she's saying they removed 1.1 million gross square feet or 17% from our global base.

What does that mean?

It means they are closing retail stores.

They are reducing their retail store capacity by 17%.

So taking that into context with digital penetration increasing,

what does that mean?

into context with digital penetration increasing. What does that mean?

They are moving from physical stores to online sales.

These are two obviously very important KPIs

to the current management operating plan

of Abercrombie & Fitch.

Additionally, she is saying that they expanded their gross profit margin

by 110 basis points, which we know is the end result of KPIs such as increasing digital penetration

and decreasing gross square feet for retail stores.

Gross profit margin is an end result

based on revenue and earnings.

So what she's saying here is that the switch

from physical retail stores to digital and online sales

has resulted in an increase in gross profit margin.

Additionally, she is saying that they fortified their balance sheet

to the end of the year, and they've got $1.3 billion of liquidity.

Now, what that definition of liquidity means,

you would go and have to do further work on,

but you have all of the balance sheet metrics

from earlier in the video series to enable you to work that out.

But again, this is an end result metric.

This is something that ends up in the financial statements. It's not

a KPI. Remember, KPIs

are measures of performance of the business that is driving revenue and earnings.

So what we take from this so far on the first page of the earnings call transcript

is that the increase and the rate of increase of digital penetration to online sales

versus removing or reducing gross square feet

for retail stores are important KPIs.

If we continue through the earnings call transcript,

we can go through some more examples.

If we just allow our eye to zoom in to what really matters,

we can see Fran is going through information here

pertaining to digital.

So results, she's saying were driven by digital,

which grew 34% to $639 million,

making up 57% of sales.

They've continued to get year-on-year improvements

in website traffic and all of this has resulted in the best digital gross margin rate in eight years

we also start finding in the earnings call transcript references to some acronyms that we would actually obviously go and have to look into further.

So she's saying here that we realized higher year over year AUR.

Obviously, you would go away and figure that out and figure out what it is.

No matter what sector you're in,

no matter what stocks you're looking at,

you're obviously going to have to do a bit of extra work,

a bit of digging to find out the definitions

of certain metrics.

We also have a reference to inventories

and the level of inventories down 7%

on a 5% revenue decline.

Inventories are a classic KPI in the retail sector

and obviously quite important.

And also the quality of inventories is also important as well.

What we also pick up on here is a reference to all four brands

that the company has in its portfolio. So yes, this may be new information at this

stage. So we pick up that the amount of brands in a portfolio and how profitable

those brands are in aggregate and relative to each other

is a KPI that's important as well.

We also pick up on another KPI called average transaction value and value.

that is from both new and existing customers.

We make a note of that and we put it in our KPI list and we do more work on it.

We can see as well that there's also a reference to a metric and it's actually an estimate for

a metric called new to file customers in digital penetration, digital growth.

And she's referencing that the channel grew over 35%. Again, this metric or this estimate of new

to file customers, this definition of new to file customers, you would go away, figure out what

the definition of that actually is, and if it's a genuine KPI, stick it in your KPI list

and do more work on it and see how it's been trending over time.

Then on the next page, we see a reference to a focus on assortment architecture.

see a reference to a focus on assortment architecture. That's really just a fancy way of saying in retail land what items they are marketing, what items they are pushing,

and the mix of the sales from the items that they are selling. And she's saying that the strategy,

the focus has been on selling high margin must-haves and their top 30 items,

and it's continuing to pay off in terms of strategy.

So with this particular operating plan,

this would actually be part of an overall management operating plan, this would actually be part of

an overall management operating plan,

but it can't really be a key performance indicator

because we can't put numbers around that.

Moving forward in the earnings call transcript

to the next page, we see a reference again

to the decrease in square footage of retail or physical stores

but now we're getting a bit more meat on the bone so she's telling us uh that in 2020 there was a closure

of 137 locations which added up to 1.1 million gross square feet or the 17 percent of the base that we saw

uh in the on the first page and she's also uh telling us that they closed 129 uh of the 137

locations 129 non-flagship stores which made made up 850,000 of the 1.1 million.

So what can we infer from that?

Well, we can infer potentially that the strategy here in detail is to close non-flagship stores

and

and keep the flagship stores open.

They are closing some flagship stores,

but not anywhere near at the rate

that they're closing non-flagship stores.

So again, we've got plenty of KPIs and numbers

to work with here.

We've got our gross square feet number,

the percentage of the base,

so that's the speed per quarter at which they're reducing.

And what they're actually reducing, we've got the amount of locations.

We can use that as a metric, a KPI going forward,

and the amount of non-flagship stores and flagship stores from those locations.

and flagship stores from those locations.

We can use them as a KPI as well and use them going forward to measure the effectiveness of the management operating plan

and to gauge an expectation of revenue and earnings in the future.

Again, the CEO here is literally telling us what's important to the management

operating plan by saying aligning square footage with digital penetration is the most important

lever to maintain and improve profitability. So guys, she is literally telling you here what the management operating plan is,

how they're actually going to achieve an increase in revenue and earnings,

and all of the numbers to focus on in achieving that.

Now, the great thing about earnings call transcripts and going through this process is that many of the KPIs

that you're going to obtain by doing this work on a particular stock are going to be the same KPIs

for many other stocks in the sector. There is definitely going to be a large overlap.

going to be a large overlap. So the good news, the good thing about this is that you only have to do the work once on a stock, create your KPI dashboard, and many of the KPIs that you have on your

dashboard are going to apply across the sector to other stocks. Now, of course, what you're going to find is when you

do this work and go through the processes, additional to KPIs that apply across the sector,

there are also going to be KPIs that are idiosyncratic to that particular stock.

to that particular stock.

You have to be mindful of this and separate out KPIs

that apply across the sector

to other stocks

and KPIs that apply only

to a particular stock.

So when you're identifying KPIs

KPIs for a particular stock. You can obviously also compare them to other stocks in the same sector.

And of course, always be mindful why you're at this stage in the first place, why you're actually

at the qualitative stage and doing the work. It's because you've identified a positive or negative outlier from the quantitative phase.

So always be asking yourself that question in the back of your mind.

It's good discipline.

Why is this stock on a premium or a discount to the sector?

It may lie in a particular KPI.

It may lie in a particular KPI.

The answer may lie in one of the KPIs or a few of the KPIs that you're looking at, whether they are good or bad.

Now, I know what you'll be thinking at this stage. my hands on a book or a cheat sheet or a shortcut or a hack to know all of the KPIs in every single

sector forever throughout time. And you may be thinking of asking us the question, Anton,

will you be providing me with all the KPIs for every GIX and NAICS sector, so I never have to do any work or

learn the information myself or go through any processes myself. Well, the answer to that question,

unfortunately, is a flat no. Why? Because over time, KPIs may change and you need to learn the process.

That's the most important thing.

At the end of the day, you have to be self-sustainable.

You have to have a good, solid work ethic.

And you have to know and understand how to process yourself so you can work smart and not hard.

Don't be one of these people who always looks for excuses and refuses to do the work

because you think you're entitled to a shortcut and for everybody else to do the work for you.

Unfortunately, there's no way you can climb

the competency hierarchy and become professional trader level

unless you do all of these processes yourself

and they become second nature to you.

Now, seeing as though we are in the retail sector,

let's have a look at a dashboard that we may have gotten if we

went through the Abercrombie & Fitch processes for qualitative analysis. So if you went through the processes for

For example, you went through the Abercrombie & Fitch financial statements, so quarterlies

and annuals.

You went through company presentations from the Investor Relations website.

And you also went through a number of earnings call transcripts, conference call transcripts

in the past.

You may have got to a dashboard

that looks something like this.

So here we've split it up and organized it

into categories of sales, inventory, stores, brands,

and customers.

So in sales, we have same-store sales,

sales per square foot.

We have that AUR metric that we identified earlier.

That is actually average unit retail.

You can look at that definition in your own time.

We have average sale per customer,

and we have online sales percentage versus physical location.

So that's all in the category of sales.

In the category of sales.

In the category of inventory,

we have an average inventory number,

inventory turnover, stock turnover days,

and sell-through rates.

For physical retail stores,

we have number of locations at the end

and beginning of the financial period in question.

We have the number of company-owned locations, number of franchises.

We have total space owned by the company in square feet,

and we have total space leased by the company in square feet,

and we have gross square feet for aggregate retail stores within the category of

brands we have the number of brands within a portfolio and we have the number of store names

and within customers we have that metric that we identified earlier new to file customers

that metric that we identified earlier, new to file customers, that is customers that are new in the database. So whenever you are doing your work in the qualitative analysis phase, going through these

processes for a particular stock, what's going to happen? You're going to end up with a dashboard that looks something like this.

And this applies to any stock in any sector.

For a particular stock in a particular sector,

you're going to categorize all of the KPIs

across the different categories that they relate to.

What we are interested in as traders in the qualitative phase

is metrics that we can actually put numbers to.

So we want to be able to measure with numbers,

with data, through time,

KPIs and performance of the business and use those KPIs to infer a management operating plan

and to predict with a probabilistic analysis the trend and an expectation of positive or negative

surprise in the future. And what we mean by that is a positive or negative surprise to future revenue

and earnings. That is the end result of KPIs trending positively or negatively or even turning.

So Abercrombie & Fitch, Q4 numbers, Q4 earnings called transcript and presentations were a classic example for traders and portfolio managers to be on top of KPIs and an inferred management operating plan. If you go back a number of slides in the video, you will see that Abercrombie & Fitch reported their full year.

And Q4 numbers, fourth quarter numbers for 2020, they reported them on the date, the 2nd of March 2021.

them on the date the 2nd of March 2021. And if we just look at a stock chart from the time, we can have a look at Q4 2020, we're looking at the months October, November, December.

We can pretty much say that the stock went from $15 a share to $20 a share in that quarter, even above $20.

even above $20, but being conservative, if we were on top of the KPIs, on top of the trend,

on top of the quantitative,

and also on top of our macro trends,

we probably would have captured that move.

And that is a $5 per share move on a $15 starting point.

So $15 to $20.

So we're getting the stock price moving up by 33%. If we then look at the first quarter in 2021,

after getting a sideways movement in December in 2020,

we can see that the stock rallies very significantly

all the way into full year and Q4 numbers,

which remember were the 2nd of March, 2021.

And you can see after they report,

the stock actually rallied

quite a lot as well. So again, like in Q4 2020, if in Q1 2021, we were on top of everything here,

our macro, our quantitative, our qualitative, our KPIs, and we were on top of the trend of what

was happening in this stock, We knew the management operating plan.

We were on top of it.

We may have had a position going into numbers

because revenue and earnings is the end result.

So if we got into this stock in January 2021

at, say, 22.5,

and then we got out of it at say 32 and a half in March we would have made

around 45 percent and yes in both of these quarters Abercrombie & Fitch as an example

in both of these quarters this fits within our 20 to 60 day time horizon

obviously because we are segmenting by quarters and for the record uh abercrombie and fitch

would have been categorized in our analysis as a turnaround story uh this stock back in 2007 and in 2011 was trading at above $70 a share.

And from 2011 onwards, the company, the stock, had a miserable decade and the turnaround didn't actually come until 2021.

turnaround didn't actually come until 2021. So Abercrombie & Fitch, classic example of a turnaround story and a great example of identifying KPIs, inferring a management operating plan, and also

how everything fits together from our qualitative analysis, our quantitative analysis as well,

and also with an assumption, a macro assumption in the background that we were leaning towards being bullish.

So that is earnings called transcripts, guys.

Fit them in, obviously, with your previous analysis for the qualitative phase when you're looking at financial statements and also company presentations.

Company presentations and transcripts, definitely the most important in identifying KPIs and inferring a management operating plan.

and inferring a management operating plan. When you're identifying KPIs

and inferring the management operating plan,

we want metrics, we want data, we want meat on the bone.

We want to be able to quantify with numbers what is the number

is driving revenue and earnings. What is behind revenue and earnings and creating revenue and earnings?

How is the company actually measuring its business? And when you get good at this, you'll be able to do it very, very quickly

and create your KPI and inferred MOP, Management Operating Plan dashboard.

Now, something else that we need to look at that is part of the qualitative assessment

is management track record.

Now, when we're looking at the management of a public company. This is obviously not like identifying KPIs where we can put numbers to the

business and our analysis, but it does fall into the category of qualitative work. And it gives us

a very good idea of the quality of the team behind the numbers, behind the business.

And here we're going to have a look at an example

where we're looking at the company HubSpot.

And with any company, you'll be able to get the leadership team,

any public company, you'll be able to get it on their website.

And you'll be able to look into the backgrounds of all the key leadership team,

all the key management team at the top of the tree.

An additional to the company website, there's multiple resources online,

obviously where you can dig around about the backgrounds of all the key leadership members of the team.

These guys are at the top of the tree of a public company, and therefore they are publicly facing.

So you're going to get information on these guys publicly.

It's going to be online. You can Google around and you can access many resources to get as

much information as you can as possible. Additionally, there's a certain lens in which

you would view a management team or leadership team through as a trader portfolio manager.

And there's certain processes that you would go through

to learn all of this qualitative information properly.

And we're going to go through these steps now

with HubSpot as the example.

So the first thing you would do is identify

who is the alpha, who is the CEO,

who's running the company.

And you would ask a whole bunch of questions of that person. Who is the alpha? Who is the CEO who's running the company?

And you would ask a whole bunch of questions

of that person.

How long have they been with the company?

What is his or her relevant experience?

Have they actually led a team before?

And if so,

Which teams?

What were the success rates?

Have they been involved in previous corporate success stories?

How much stock and stock options do they actually own?

Are they invested in the success, the future success of the company?

And also, what pedigree do they have?

Where did they go to school?

And what did they actually study at school?

These are the questions that you should ask of all key management personnel that are in leadership

roles in a public company. So here for HubSpot, we have the CEO, Brian Halligan, and he's not just the CEO of the company he is also the co-founder which tells us

there were other co-founders as well so Brian Halligan he's a co-founder and the current CEO

of HubSpot so how long has he been at the company he's been there since the very beginning. Now, what's his actual experience? Well, previously,

before starting HubSpot, he was a venture partner at Longworth Ventures and a VP of sales at Groove

Networks, which was acquired by Microsoft. So if we're asking these questions, what's his relevant experience?

Has he actually led a team before?

And has he been involved in previous corporate success stories?

The answers are very obvious.

He's got experience in the industry.

He's led teams.

industry, he's led teams, and he's also had previous corporate success by building a company and selling it to Microsoft. Now, we're going to get onto stock and stock options ownership

a bit later on, but answering the last question, where did they go to school and what did they

actually do at school? Well, he went to the University of Vermont and did a BSEE.

And he did an MBA at MIT's Sloan School of Management,

where now he's also a senior lecturer

and he's teaching a course called

Scaling Entrepreneurial Ventures.

So as we're going through our qualitative work,

our first step, things are looking pretty good

with Brian Halligan as the CEO of HubSpot.

All of our questions that we've seeked answers to so far

that we can get answers to at this stage

have been answered positively.

The next step we would take after we've looked at the ceo uh is to look at other people in management and the next

step we take is to identify primary or key management positions

And what we're trying to do is identify the primary beaters.

These are our lieutenants.

The primary beaters are our lieutenants.

They are the key members of the management team that are actually, on a daily basis, implementing the plans of management.

of management.

So in the HubSpot example,

we start with this guy, Dharmesh Shah,

who's a chief technical officer,

and he's also a co-founder.

So there's a question mark actually here over Dharmesh Shah,

whether he is a legacy alpha or not,

whether he is subservient

to the CEO or not.

We would have to do further work on that.

But certainly the rest of these guys outside Darmesh Shah,

we can pretty much say with high probability

that these guys are management lieutenants,

senior management lieutenants, they are primary beaters.

And they report to the alpha, Brian Halligan.

So all of these guys and their backgrounds are very, very important.

It's very important that the primary beaters

are extremely effective.

So we start with the CFO, the chief financial officer,

and in the HubSpot example, this is Kate Bucher.

So we're answering the question here, who is actually looking after the books?

Next up, we've got the chief product officer, which is Christopher O'Donnell.

He obviously has a very important role in the company at management level, and he is spearheading product development at HubSpot.

Why is he really important?

Well, in any business without a product, there simply are no customers.

Next up is the chief architect, a guy called Whitney Sorenson.

In this business, he's extremely important at the management level

because he is spearheading the engineering effort for the product,

so the engineering effort behind the product.

And without good engineering, there is no product.

So HubSpot is a CRM, a client relationship management tool.

And if you want a first-class product in that industry, you need first-class engineering.

So the chief architect, Whitney Sorenson, is definitely a key member of the management team and is a Lieutenant Primary Beta

reporting to the CEO.

Next up at Primary Beta Management level

is Corporate and Business Development, Andrew Lindsay.

This guy is in charge of the expansion strategy of the company, which is obviously extremely key to growing the business.

And next up after that is the CMO, Chief Marketing Officer, Kip Bodnar.

In any business, in any industry, for a particular company, growth is simply not possible without killer marketing.

So we go through the phase of identifying our key lieutenants, our primary betas that report to the alpha.

And then we also, by default, identify secondary betas, so secondary or less than key management positions.

These guys also report to the CEO,

but their roles are less important than the primary beaters.

So we have our chief customer officer,

chief people officer,

executive VP revenue operations,

general counsel,

executive VP revenue operations, general counsel, executive VP customer success,

and chief security officer and senior VP for engineering.

So the lens in the way that you have to view management

and the processes that you go through,

at the management level,

you need to identify who the key people are below the CEO.

So who are the primary beaters?

And also identify who are the hangers-on or the people who have pretty much token positions at management level.

So who are the secondary beaters?

Why?

So who are the secondary beaters?

Why?

Well, because it's the alpha and the primary beaters that drive the product, the management operating plan, and the KPIs.

And this is what ultimately drives revenue and earnings and the success of the company.

of the company. And for the record, in the hierarchy beneath the alpha, we identify the primary and secondary betas, but then there's also tertiary betas. So these are lower level

management personnel. And we also have the workers, which we call deltas. So when you're going to look at a company's management

and you're actually appraising the management track record, you have to go through a process

of identifying who the key guys are. So this is a good template to use. Identify the alpha,

the alpha, split up the beta's, the lieutenants into primary and secondary beta's, and appraise their backgrounds, appraise their management track record. In the HubSpot example, we can look at all of the

primary beaters. We get all the information on their backgrounds on the company website,

and you can even just start Googling their names as well and hoarding information to appraise

their management track record. Something else that you would likely be very interested in

when you're going through the qualitative phase is who sits on the

board. Who are the board of directors? And something that you have to understand here

is that for a public company, the board of directors is not supposed to be subservient

to the CEO and management.

What you have to look for when you're assessing the board of directors is you need to look for evidence of political incest amongst beaters.

How many of the beaters are sitting on the board?

What is the overlap?

And have a look at additional personnel on the board as well,

and what relationships they may or may not have had in the past with primary and secondary

beaters in management.

At the end of the day, the board of directors is supposed to keep the CEO and management in check.

So high integrity is required from the board of directors.

We don't want to see lots of evidence of political incest.

We only want to really see that if we're thinking about shorting a stock.

that if we're thinking about shorting a stock. So if we're looking at a negative outlier,

we would want to see evidence of political incest. But certainly, if we're looking to go long, if we've identified a positive outlier in a sector, we need high integrity from the board.

high integrity from the board.

So what do we get from HubSpot as our example?

Well, we get a great situation.

We have great product, great engineering,

an awesome marketing effort, a very solid expansion strategy,

and across management,

we have a very strong management background.

And as a bonus, we also have a board of directors

with high integrity.

And guess what?

This has all manifested itself into an awesome business,

an awesome company, and a very, very good performing stock.

So obviously when we look at stock price performance,

as we've looked at before in multiple examples,

in the context of a trade idea, we obviously have

make some assumptions here that at the time you will have been bullish on the macro environment

with a net long bias in your portfolio. You will have been bullish on the sector and you will have

identified a particular stock, in this example HubSpot, as a positive outlier in the sector.

hubspot as a positive outlier in the sector. So through your quant analysis, identifying hubspot as a positive outlier in the sector, and then of course you will have moved on to the next level

and done the qualitative analysis and then decided the timing was good and you either bought the stock as an outright long or structured it

as a long option structure utilizing call options. And if we look at two periods in recent history from the time of recording. So if we look at Q4 2020 and we look at Q1 2021,

then we'll see some outperformance

and some big opportunity back then for absolute return.

So if you imagine yourself sitting in October 2020, so the beginning of October 2020, and you've done all your work on HubSpot, it's not unreasonable to assume that in Q4 you would have bought this stock at around 300 or in the low 300s and sold it either in the high 300s or around $400.

So within our 20 to 60-day time horizon as long-short portfolio managers

and returning roughly a 30, 33% return, something like this.

33% return, something like this. If you were either coming into the new year in 2021 and you'd missed that move, that's okay. You may have come in and done your work and realized that HubSpot

was probably still a buy at the time. You may have also been in the position in q4 and traded out and then you were faced with

the choice of looking to take a position in something else or even restructuring the trade

given the new fundamentals or situation at the time in the market it doesn't really matter

at the time in the market.

It doesn't really matter.

If you just think at the end of Q4, beginning of Q1,

you were faced with the choices.

And one of the choices is to just buy HubSpot or not.

And buying it for the 12th.

20 to 60 day time horizon, obviously not as an investment.

Well, you would have had a slightly more volatile

or wild ride in Q1 2021, owning HubSpot versus Q4 2020,

but it's not unreasonable to assume

that you would have captured about $100 of performance in Q1 and making that $100 performance

from a starting point of around $400. So making a roughly 25% return within the 20 to 60 day time

horizon, which is obviously very good.

And if you think about performance in terms of absolute return

in Q4 2020 and Q1 2021 in HubSpot,

we are just talking here about underlying performance in the stock.

So we're assuming here that you were just owning the stock.

What if you did all your work, all the

stars were aligned, the timing was right, and there were favorable option structures that you could

trade at the time, which generally speaking, there usually is, as long as you know what you're doing,

then of course, that return can be levered. And you would make a much higher return than the 30 33 percent return

in q4 from that move of uh $300 to $400 and you'd make a lot more as well uh even in q1 2021

from the $100 move of the $400 base so the 25 percent move in the $400 base, so the 25% move in the underlying, you'd make a much higher absolute

return via option structures. So HubSpot provides a very, very good qualitative example here, and also

a good example of a stock and the type of volatility and performance over our 20 to 60 day time horizon

that we're seeking to achieve

from long positive outlier positions.

Now, remember guys, when we do look at examples,

they are just examples and they're examples from the past

to help you understand how we do things

and to understand the process.

This is not an endorsement for you to go out and go and buy HubSpot.

Think of it in the process that we're looking at

and use the process as a template

and generate new and original trade ideas.

And obviously it needs to be you that generates the ideas, not us or a third party or somebody

else and your copy trading.

That's just for idiots.

So please don't make the rookie mistake of thinking examples in the PTM video series

are stocks that you should be going out and going long and short.

What we're doing here is showing you the step-by-step process,

and at the moment, we are in the qualitative phase.

And yes, as we go along, we're going to be using examples

to highlight what you should be looking for

and also how everything fits together in the process.

Now, the next step in the qualitative phase,

we will be looking at insider stock

and stock option ownership.

And we're going to be using HubSpot again as our example.

So we'll carry on looking at HubSpot

for insider stock and stock option ownership.

Our source here is Fidelity,

which is all publicly available information. Sources obviously will change over time,

get used to the process, and get used to Googling keywords and phrases. So keywords and phrases like

the name of the company and ownership and insider stock and stock option ownership.

If you follow the process, you'll find multiple sources.

And of course, sources will change over time

and likely get better over time.

So here, when we look at the insider stock

and stock option ownership using Fidelity for HubSpot.

At the time of recording, we find that Dharmesh Shah is by far the biggest shareholder of the company.

Remember, Dharmesh Shah is a co-founder alongside the current CEO, Brian Halligan,

and Dharmesh Shah was our potential legacy alpha,

and he is by far the largest shareholder of the company.

So when we realize this, when we're going through our processes,

if you see something like this, it's very likely that the guy here, Dharmesh Shah, is the real big daddy alpha or founder of the company.

We obviously have to use some discretion and common sense here

and just think to ourselves at the time,

why isn't he the CEO?

Well, maybe he just isn't a CEO type

and he's more of a builder or engineer.

We can also do a little bit of simple further work and work out what his stock

is actually worth at the time. So Dharmesh Shah, he owns just over 1.5 million shares.

So his worth, his stock worth is around $861 million. And Brian Halligan, his stock holding is worth around $360 million.

So between them, the two co-founders, Dhamas Shah and Brian Halligan, they own just over, at the time, $1.2 billion worth of money.

of stock. Now we know that HubSpot is a New York Stock Exchange listed company and they are well

past their IPO lockup period, which typically ranges from 90 to 180 days. So what's happening

here is that Dharmesh Shah and Brian Halligan, they've chosen to hold on to their stock well beyond the IPO lockup

period. Now, what also happens when you go through this stage of the qualitative process is that

you'll discover that there's other shareholders that you may yet have not discovered in the process.

So what we've done is we've discovered that there's new people involved in the company in a shareholder capacity.

And what you can do is,

is start collecting the information on their share ownership and also on the

people themselves.

and also on the people themselves.

So additional to the founders,

we do have sizable stockholders of HubSpot.

We have Donald J. Sherman, who's the president.

He owns about $38 million of stock.

We have John Kinza, CFO.

He owns about $37 million of stock. we have michael k simon a director

he owns around 24 million dollars of the stock we have hunter madeley uh hunter madeley owns around 18 million dollars of the stock and we have lawrence s bone a director. Lawrence S. Bone owns $10 million of stock. So in your process, you just

go through this and you list them and you work out the worth of their stock. In the bigger picture,

these amounts of stock in terms of notional dollar value are actually very small in the bigger picture. And what you can also do is start checking the background of these people

and figure out their experience and integrity in the industry.

So you can see on the page here, we've done this for all of these guys.

So on this page, we have Donald Sherman, John Kinzer, and Michael K. Simon.

And what we've got here actually is their LinkedIn profiles. So yes, you can just Google these people

and you will find sources of their current occupation and their background and figure out how and why they're actually involved

as shareholders at the company so you can see here uh donald j sherman

he's now the ex-president and he actually stepped down in 2020 and he was the full

former president and COO, chief operating officer.

And currently he's the CEO of Dashlane.

So what does that mean?

It means Donald Sherman is a legacy shareholder.

Same situation with John Kinzer.

He's actually the former chief financial officer.

And he, according to his LinkedIn profile, left as the CFO of HubSpot

in January 2019. Also, according to his LinkedIn profile, he's on the board of a number of companies

and currently he's an operating partner of Stripes Group. So again, as a former employee or management team member, John Kinzer is a legacy shareholder.

Next up, Michael K. Simon. If we look at his LinkedIn profile, how he's involved in the company. He's actually on the board of directors. So you

can reconcile that with the board members on the website that we looked at earlier. So Michael K.

Simon, he's not a legacy shareholder. He's a current shareholder who's also on the board and

involved with the company at the current time.

Continuing on, we come to Hunter Medley, who's actually the former Senior Vice President Chief Sales Officer of HubSpot.

According to his LinkedIn profile, he left the company in July 2019.

left the company in July 2019. And previous to that, he was at Salesforce, and he is currently the CEO of a company called Vena Solutions. So Hunter Madeley is again, another legacy

shareholder. And then we come to our search as to how Lawrence Bone is involved in the company. Well, Lawrence,

aka Larry Bone, was an original investor in HubSpot pre-IPO when it was a private company.

General Catalyst invested $5 million in HubSpot

way back in 2007, and he also served on the board.

Now, given that the company has now been public for a while,

and there was a lot of legacy situations here when we were looking at our insider stock

and stock option ownership

not forgetting that the value of these uh stock holdings was pretty small in the bigger picture

it probably means that all of these guys have been exiting their position

and paring down their stock holdings over a number of years.

And as part of our process, we would go off and just do a little bit of work and confirm that.

So what have we actually learned here?

Well, all of the shareholders in the HubSpot example,

the additional shareholders that we discovered,

shareholders that we discovered, additional to the current situation where we have the two co-founders who are the biggest shareholders, all of those additional guys were legacy situations

with the exception of Michael K. Simon, who actually currently serves on the board of directors.

Simon, who actually currently serves on the board of directors. So it's interesting that they still all own stock in the company, but we would have to see if they've been selling down their stock

holdings from larger positions. Now, in this case, this does not mean that it's a bearish signal for the stock. These guys helped build the company and they could just be cashing

in. That doesn't mean the stock can't go up much further. So you do have to use some common sense

here and some general knowledge and understanding of how finance and how private to public companies and IPOs work.

And you do have to read between the lines and have some discretion here.

Just because some key members of management are paring down their positions,

it doesn't mean that the stock can't go up or it's a bearish signal for the stock.

For one, they could just be cashing in

to finance their next project or retirement.

And secondly, the size of their stock holding

might be so small that it's actually fairly irrelevant.

Now, on that note, after we've looked in our process at insider stock and stock option

ownership, the next thing we would move on to is to look at transactions. So we look at a recent

transaction history and we look at the activity of management and what they've been up to in terms of trading out of their stock positions.

And we try to figure out from management if they've been light or aggressive in their selling of their own stock.

Now, again, we have to use some common sense, read between the lines here and use some discretion

even if someone in management has been aggressive in terms of selling stock they might be doing it

for other reasons other than for the cynical reason that they think their own

stock is going to go down. They may just be cashing in and retiring or moving on to their next project.

What this analysis does, however, is it just gives us another data point in our overall process.

Now, with the HubSpot example, using Fidelity as our source at the the time when we looked at this,

it showed us that Dharmesh Shah and Brian Halligan,

as to be expected,

are transacting in the largest amounts of stock of insiders,

and we sorted by market value.

And we can see here that the biggest transaction

took place in December 2020, and that was Dharmesh Shah selling $15.5 million worth of stock in that month.

And the second biggest transaction was Dharmesh Shah again selling $10.1 million worth of stock in February 2021.

We can also see that our CEO, Mr. Brian Halligan,

has been making sales of notional value

of between $1 million and $4 million

during the year of 2020.

Now, if you remember back to the value

of their entire holdings, they were much, much bigger

than this. So these sizes of these sales are tiny compared to their overall holdings. This should

give us confidence that they actually want their stock to either stay at current levels or go to higher levels.

So they're actually selling, but they're selling very lightly.

They're not being aggressive.

So the big guys, the co-founders, they are still in and they own a lot of stock.

and they own a lot of stock.

Now, something else that we may do with transactions is to not only sort by market value,

but also sort by date

to have a look at the most recent transactions.

And when we do that,

what we find is that our current CFO,

who through further work is actually an outgoing CFO. She's leaving the company. So

this is Catherine Buecher. We can see that she's been active with chip sizes in the hundreds of

thousands of dollars. Now, does this mean that it's a bearish signal for the stock if the current CFO

is leaving the company and they're selling stock in the

hundreds of thousands of dollars value, not necessarily. You would obviously need to do

further work on it and figure out what she is actually doing and where she's going and figure

out a probabilistic scenario as to why she's selling the stock. In this situation, the sizes

are insignificant and it's probably or highly likely that she's financing the next stage of her life.

It's nothing really to write home about. What we also find when we look at most recent transactions here in this example is that we see other order types from Dharmesh Shah and Brian Halligan, and they are disposing of stock using public market prices, using the market as a reference

for price, and transferring their stock internally to new members of staff that are coming into the

company or, in fact, to the employee compensation pool. Now. Now of course we'll never know this 100%

for sure but this is probably the case. So all of this is fairly reassuring during our qualitative

assessment. If we did see large selling transactions from insiders, this would obviously be a cause for concern.

We would have to do further investigation and figure out the likely reason, the probabilistic

reason why this is actually happening. But remember, a founder selling all of their stock doesn't mean the stock can't go up. They could just be retiring

or have no particular view on the stock because they're just leaving the company. A new team

can still 10x a stock even after the founder has left. So when you're doing this qualitative

analysis of looking at insider stock and stock option ownership and transactions, please don't make the rookie retail trader error thinking that because someone in management is selling some stock, that it's a bearish signal automatically for the stock and that the stock is going to go down.

That is a very, very low quality

and silly way of thinking. Okay, so an appraisal of the insider stock and stock ownership

and having a look at the ownership and also the transactions is an important part of the overall qualitative assessment.

So just make sure that you make an appraisal

of the insider stock and stock option ownership

and the transactions.

The next thing we're going to look at

in our qualitative assessment

is research analyst estimates and the estimate ranges and ratings.

Now, in the bigger picture, what we're trying to do here

when we're looking at analyst estimates for a stock

and we're looking at the range of those estimates

and the ratings that analysts have on stocks, on a particular stock,

what we're trying to achieve here in the bigger picture

is an understanding of the expectation of the future as set by the market.

And from a qualitative perspective, it's important for us to understand this

for multiple reasons, as you're going to see as we go through

this process. But what we're trying to figure out here in the bigger picture is the lay of the land.

What does the lay of the land in terms of expectations for the stock in the future actually look like.

And from that analysis, we can actually infer many important data points.

So the example we're using here, we're going back to our example earlier of Abercrombie & Fitch, ANF.

And we're using Yahoo Finance as a source here.

And the first thing we're going to look at is estimates.

And most importantly, we're going to be looking at estimates for EPS and for revenue.

And this is a process that you would follow using it as a template in all situations. You would just go step by step through the processes and use this as a template

when you're analyzing individual stocks and their estimates for EPS and revenue and the ranges of

those estimates. So if we look at the table on the left with Abercrombie & Fitch, ANF,

the table on the left with Abercrombie & Fitch, ANF.

We can see the stock price at 37.49. And we can see the table for earnings estimates

and also the table for revenue estimates

looking forward both on a quarterly basis

in the current year and looking forward

on an annual basis for subsequent future years.

So we can see from the table straight away where we are in terms of timing.

We are in the current year, 2021.

So if you think back to our spreadsheets, when we were looking at processing the data for particular sectors and stocks within those sectors, if the current year is 2021, then that would be represented in the column as our ECG.

EPS 1 number, and 2022 would be our EPS 2 number. What we're going to concentrate on here for the

purposes of this demonstration is the EPS 2 number. So we're going to be looking at 2022 estimates,

so forward-looking beyond the current financial year. So we'll be looking at earnings, EPS in 2022, and we'll also be looking

at revenue in 2022. In reality, when you're doing this for real, of course, you would also consider

the EPS one number as well. But for purposes of demonstration, we're just going to look at 2022 here,

and you can utilize this same type of analysis when you're looking at the EPS1 number as well.

And also, of course, if you're looking at revenue in 2022 or more than one year forward,

so the next year, and also in the current year.

So in terms of analyst estimates and the range,

when we look at full year 2022,

the EPS range is 89 cents at the low end

and $1.94 at the high end.

And we have 12 analysts covering the stock. So we have 12

analysts that have ratings. So there will be an analyst that is setting the low end at 89 cents

and an analyst that is setting the high end at $1.94 and 10 analysts in between that. All we have to do to get the mean consensus

is divide through and we get $1.50. And this has been done for us by our source, Yahoo Finance.

Now, an interesting step in the process, and you would do this when you're looking at this for real, is to actually work out what is the halfway point between the low end of the range and the high end of the range of analysts' estimates. And this just gives us a better understanding of the distribution of analysts

estimates within that range. So our halfway point here for Abercrombie and Fitch 2022 EPS estimates,

our halfway point in the range is just above $1.41. Now with a mean consensus of $1.50,

that just means that there's more analysts

that are closer to the high end of the range, $1.94,

than the bottom end of the range at 89 cents.

So in this situation, it's quite likely that the analyst who is setting the bottom of the range at 89 cents is a negative outlier analyst because the mean is above the halfway point.

So the distribution is skewed towards the positive.

moving on to revenue if we look at revenue in 2022 the revenue range is 3.36 billion to 3.59 billion with a full year mean consensus of 3.5 billion the halfway point in the range is $3.475 billion.

So again, similar to EPS and the distribution there,

there are more analysts that are closer to the higher end of the range at $3.59 billion versus the low end of the range at $3.36 billion.

So again, it's likely in this situation that the analyst who's setting the bottom end of the range is a negative outlier analyst because the distribution is skewed to the positive.

From our source, we also get given a full year mean consensus sales growth percentage number, which comes in at 12.1%.

Now, in the bigger picture, the mean number for these ranges is meaningful because there's a decent

amount of analysts covering the stock. You will go through many situations where you only have two,

three, or four analysts covering a stock, and you'll go through many situations where you only have two, three, or four analysts covering

a stock, and you'll go through other situations where you have 15, 20, 25 analysts covering a

stock. And as with anything, the more data points we have, the more statistically significant a result

becomes. So the more analysts that are covering a stock, the more meaningful and likely that the

consensus mean will be accurate or very close to being accurate. So this is something you'll be

dealing with on a regular basis each quarter when you're going into earnings numbers, you'll be looking at analyst estimates and the range

and figuring out the distribution of the estimates,

whether the real distribution is skewed towards the positive

or the negative or very close to the halfway point.

And the more analysts covering the stock,

the more weight we put on it in terms of accuracy.

So, of course, you're going to have to repeat the same analysis each quarter for every stock that you're considering.

Now, you have to remember that these are analysts' estimates.

So it is what is expected by the market.

Now, in this situation, because we know that most analysts are near the top of the range,

if Abercrombie & Fitch, ANF, guide lower for 2022, so they guide lower than $1.50 of EPS for 2022, then the stock will likely go down.

This will be a disappointment to the market.

And of course, these estimates from analysts will change throughout the year.

This is a dynamic situation.

Analysts are going to change their EPS and revenue estimates based on new

information that becomes publicly available to the market. Something else you will do in this part

of the qualitative analysis is you will also look at the trend of estimates changes in the near past.

So from our same source, Yahoo Finance, in the last 30 days,

Abercrombie & Fitch has seen four increases in quarterly EPS estimates in the current year.

So in 2021 and in the current quarter that we're sitting in at the time.

And there's been two increases in EPS estimates for the following quarter in 2021.

And what we can see in the table is that there's been corresponding increases in the full year 2022 numbers and in 2023 as well.

So it looks like the same analysts are increasing their full year 22 and 23 numbers as well.

If we were going through this process as part of our qualitative analysis and we were looking at this through a long lens, this would obviously be great news.

However, if we're looking through a short lens, we would be very concerned.

qualitative assessment, yes, you are going to have to look at analyst estimates and ranges and do a little bit of work on them and figure out, firstly, the range and the distribution

within the range.

So, the mean consensus versus the halfway point and figure out what the skew is for the distribution of analysts estimates

within the range. And secondly, look at the change in estimates and the trend of those

changes in the near past. I

Ideally, what we want to be seeing is that the market agrees with our synopsis.

So if we're coming into our qualitative assessment with a bullish bias, we have a positive outlier.

What do we want to see?

We want to see a positive skew in the distribution.

And we want to see estimates of forward-looking estimates from analysts being changed in the near past and trending upwards.

This means the market fundamentally is on our side and it agrees with our synopsis.

Something else you need to look at in addition to estimates and the range and having an understanding of that is the lay of the land in terms of analyst ratings given to the stock.

Using the same source here, Yahoo Finance, and of course this will be available with multiple sources online. You can see that we get a couple of things displayed

to us in terms of the ratings. So first of all, we have the descriptors of the ratings where we have

strong buy, buy, hold, underperform, and sell. We'll come onto those in a second. But essentially, we get two things that we can look at.

Firstly, we get the distribution of those ratings amongst analysts, across the analysts.

And secondly, we get how that distribution has changed in the recent past.

What we also get is an average rating monitor, so the recommendation rating monitor

as an average. And we also get the average price target from analysts, with a range of the price

targets as well. And recall, the current stock price is $37.49 at the time of recording.

So let's talk here briefly about the descriptors of ratings themselves. So there's essentially

three ratings an analyst can actually give a stock.

It's either going to be a buy rating, a hold rating, which can also be described as neutral, or a sell rating.

And strong buy just means buy, okay?

And underperform just means sell.

So if you see the term outperform, it just means buy. If you see the term underperform

or even strong sell, it just means sell. So the way to look at this is always just think of it in terms of ratings,

of buy, hold, or neutral, or sell.

And what you've also got to remember

is that these ratings are not referring to

outperforming or underperforming the general stock market.

It's with reference to a relative call

on the stock to the stock's sector.

So if you see a buy rating on a stock, it does not mean

that the analyst is saying they think this stock is going to outperform the market. It means they

think that the stock is going to outperform the sector. And of course, the opposite is true. If you locate a stock that has a sell recommendation, an analyst has a sell recommendation on that

stock, it means the analyst thinks it's going to underperform the other stocks in the sector.

So it's underperforming the sector average.

In addition, what you have to remember is that when an analyst covers multiple stocks in a sector, they have to have an equal number of buy and sell recommendations.

They can't just have a distribution of ratings with stocks across a sector where they're just bullish everything or they have everything on a

hold recommendation, they generally have to have an equal amount of buy and sell recommendations.

And it stands to reason, if you have a bunch of stocks in a sector, let's say, for example, 20,

from all of the estimates out there, the consensus estimates for forward-looking EPS,

for revenue, et cetera,

there's obviously going to be a mean average.

And at any one moment in time,

there's going to be stocks

that contribute positively to that average,

and there's going to be stocks

that contribute negatively to that average. It there's going to be stocks that contribute negatively to that average.

It can never be the case that it's any different to that. It's always going to be the case.

So when analysts have buy ratings or sell ratings, what they're actually saying to you

is that their buy ratings are stocks that they believe will outperform the sector average

and their sell ratings are stocks that they believe will underperform the sector average.

Now, on top of that, they also have price targets and this also sets a range across the analysts

for price targets themselves.

And in our example here with Abercrombie & Fitch,

we can see the low end of the range

for a price targets is $22.

The high end of the range is $46.

The average is $34.

and 11 cents and the stock is currently trading at $37.49 and for our recommendation ratings

our distribution gives us an average of 2.5 which is somewhere between a hold and a buy

now we mentioned earlier that with our ratings, we do get a couple of things.

We get the distribution of ratings, and we get the distribution changing throughout time.

What you also can look at is the upgrades, downgrades, and maintains of ratings in the near past and throughout history.

And what we see here with Abercrombie & Fitch is an upgrade, so one upgrade from neutral rating

to buy rating from UBS in April 2021.

And before that, we see multiple reiterations

of sell or hold ratings, and the reiterations of sell or hold ratings.

And the reiteration of sell ratings or underperform or underweight ratings is coming from Morgan

Stanley and Bank of America.

And the reiteration of a neutral rating comes previously from UBS.

So they reiterated a neutral rating after initiating as a neutral, and then they end up

upgrading the rating later on. Now, something you would do in your processes is look at the

stock price performance over the near term past. So if we think of the stock price performance over the near term past so if we think of the stock

price movement and put into context the estimates changes the range and also the

ratings changes in the context of the stock price movement. If we look at the stock price, it went from $20

in November 2020 to $37 in April 2021. And Abercrombie & Fitch, the stock price,

massively outperformed the retail sector. So what does that mean? In terms of the ratings, it means that analysts

were wrong here. Why? Because most analysts had this stock on a hold rating and big analysts

at investment banks like Bank of America and Morgan Stanley were reiterating underperform

or underweight ratings during the time period.

And also UBS reiterated a neutral rating and they upgraded the stock.

to a buy rating after the price had moved.

So when we think of our image display here on the left-hand side,

and we're looking at the average rating and also the average price target,

it's very likely that the price target has moved up to $34.11 from a lower level and a lower range in response to the stock price actually going up.

Also, what's interesting is if we think of the ratings distribution in the context of the stock price movement over this period,

we can see that the average rating has actually gone up.

So if you look at the distribution in February, we have 17 analysts and we have 10 hold ratings.

We have four underperform ratings and we have two sell ratings.

So that makes 16 out of 17 analysts,

which must mean we had one strong buy.

But if you think of what the average rating

will have been in February,

it would have been hovering around

between underperform and hold.

So the average rating score on our scale here on Yahoo Finance in February would have been somewhere around 3.5.

And then we move into March and we notice a few things.

And we notice a few things. The first thing we notice is that the amount of analysts covering the stock has gone down from 17 to 13.

So four analysts in the market dropped coverage of the stock.

And what this resulted in was a change in the distribution.

Not least because there's now no longer any sell recommendations.

The amount of underperforms has gone down from four to two, and the amount of hold recommendations

has gone down from 10 to seven. Now, we don't know the exact details of the analysts from the chart here that dropped the recommendations or dropped their coverage, but it's fairly likely that the guys that did this were the guys that, first of all, had sell recommendations and possibly underperform recommendations.

So it looks like here that they've dropped coverage

instead of having to go through the embarrassment

of upgrading the rating on the stock

and admitting that they got it totally wrong.

So that's what's likely to be the case here.

However, of course, we would have to go away and check the details on that.

Also, what we notice is that there's an increase in buy ratings or buy and strong buy ratings.

And in our history table of ratings changes on the right-hand side, we don't actually see evidence of that, so we probably have to go and check that

to see if it's actually the case.

You can do that by Googling search terms like ANF upgraded

from hold to buy or neutral to buy.

And then looking in Google News and seeing what the most recent headlines were

with regards to ratings changes.

But given what we know about this distribution

and how it's changed very quickly

over a one month period,

it seems likely that whoever upgraded the stock from a hold to a buy

or a strong buy may have done it very quietly and not actually put out a press release.

What you need to be careful of here is obviously trying to work smart and not too hard.

obviously trying to work smart and not too hard. You know, don't go down huge rabbit holes and spend lots of time trying to figure out exactly what ratings every single investment bank and brokerage

company has on a stock. Just understand the distribution and the basics of what it looked like in the past or in the near past

and what it looks like now, roughly speaking.

So that's the situation in March.

And then when we move to April, we see a decrease in coverage from 13 analysts to 12.

And the analyst that seems to have disappeared

is the analyst or one of the analysts

that in March had an underperform rating.

So that analyst has dropped coverage.

And now we've got seven analysts with a hold rating.

We've got two with a buy rating.

And we've got two with a strong buy rating, which leaves

us with one analyst that has an underperformed rating.

So going through this process, it really helps us to understand the lay of the land and putting

it into context of the stock price movement in the near past.

of the stock price movement in the near past.

When you go through this process,

you're actually going to learn how analysts have been predicting

and responding to the actual real live market.

And in the Abercrombie,

from the Fitch analysis here in this example,

what we found is that analysts have got this very wrong

in terms of ratings in the near past.

And also, if you think about what we looked at earlier

with this example, where we looked at the positive skew

in terms of the distribution

for the consensus mean EPS versus the midpoint

and the consensus mean revenue number versus the midpoint and also the increases in the last 30

days of EPS estimates. It's pretty obvious when we put all this together, the ratings changes, the estimates,

and the stock price movement that analysts have got this wrong. And they are changing their ratings

and upping their estimates to come to the present situation in response to the stop price movement and likely the numbers that the company has

reported and forward-looking guidance increasing. So if we look at the stop price movement here over this time

period, so we're looking from early November to the end of April.

So from the beginning of November 2020

to the end of April 2021,

and we compare this performance

to the S&P 500 retail sector,

we can see that Abercrombie & Fitch

over this time period

significantly outperformed the S&P 500 retail sector.

And what we've done over this time period is we've indexed the performance of Abercrombie & Fitch to 100.

And we've also indexed the performance of the S&P 500 retail sector at the beginning of the period to 100 as well.

And you can see that, roughly speaking, Abercrombie and Fitch outperformed the S&P 500 retail sector by 140%, which is obviously a huge outperformance in such a short space of time and if we look at the uh

absolute stock price so we look at uh anf abercrombie and fitch in absolute terms uh if we look back

to uh november the month of november 2020 you you'll remember that we picked the base number at that time as $20.

So it was actually in, even at the beginning of November,

we were being conservative there because even at the beginning of November,

it was actually around $15.

But anyway, it goes from $15, $20 a share.

So in that region, over the time period, up to $37.49 at the end of April 2021.

So using $15 as our starting point and $37.50 as our end point.

That's $22.50 on a $15 stock price.

We're getting a 150% return in terms of performance

in this stock over the time period.

Now, what's the point of all this

in terms of looking at analyst ratings? What's the point of this example? What's the point of all of it? Well, the point is, is that as traders, what we like to see is that we like to see room for changes in recommendations. So in our example, in Abercrombie & Fitch,

six months ago, the landscape will have looked

very, very different.

The average rating would have been around a hold

to underperform ratings, which means that there was

actually, at the time, room for upgrades,

which in themselves are catalysts that can get the stock moving.

So if you think of an extreme example where every single analyst in the market

has a sell recommendation or underperform recommendation for their rating.

What does that actually mean? Well, it actually means that no one can downgrade the stock. No one

can downgrade their rating because every analyst in the market has the lowest rating possible. What can only happen in that situation

is that analysts can upgrade their rating. That's the only thing that can happen.

And of course, it's the same situation in the opposite. If every single analyst has a strong

buy or buy rating on a stock in the market,

no analyst can actually upgrade their rating in the future.

In that situation,

the only thing that analysts can do is downgrade their rating.

And this is why we look at the distribution of ratings

for research analysts. Because in our qualitative analysis,

as traders, we like catalysts. We like as many catalysts as possible

that are going to get the stock moving. And although it's not a prerequisite or

an absolute necessity for it to be there, it's always nice to see that for our potential

long ideas, we have room for upgrades.

And for our potential short ideas, we see room for downgrades.

This, however, doesn't mean that when we're going through our qualitative analysis, that if we see all analysts with a buy rating for a potential long idea, or we see all analysts with sell ratings for a potential short idea, that we can't actually go long or short.

We just have to be very careful to understand that in those situations,

we might be entering consensus positioning.

So we have to be cautious.

But by going through this process,

going through this part of the qualitative process,

what we're actually doing here is understanding the lay of the land. We're understanding whether there is actually room

for upgrades or downgrades,

and potentially whether there's extreme,

bullish or bearish analyst estimates,

ratings, and therefore sentiment.

When we do have room for upgrades or downgrades,

so when we have room for upgrades for long ideas,

on the upside with longs,

it means analysts on the whole are being too cautious.

And when we have room for ratings changes to the downside

for potential short ideas,

it usually means that the analysts in the market are in denial. Either way, although

it's not a must-have, we do like to see this. We do like to see, as traders, that we have

potential room for upgrades or downgrades in the way that we're trading. Why? Because it means analysts are responding

and not actually predicting like us. We are taking the position. We are predicting what's going to happen

in the future. And then analysts are responding to it and then providing us with catalysts and the

stock price is moving on those catalysts.

What you have to understand about research analysts is that they are career-driven corporate salarymen.

They are career animals and they very rarely stick their neck out and make a big call.

They just want to get paid and they just want to put their kids

through private school now of course we don't go out there and look for uh situations

to generate trade ideas where we see uh stocks that have

all sell ratings and all buy ratings and go against the analysts. That's just ridiculous.

Of course not. You have to go through your processes properly. You identify your positive

and negative outliers, and then you go on to the qualitative analysis. And this is one part of it.

This is one part of it, guys, where you're understanding the distribution of ratings.

one part of it, guys, where you're understanding the distribution of ratings, you're understanding the range of estimates, and you're understanding the positive or negative skew from the market

when we look at mean consensus estimates versus midpoints. We don't use one part of our trade idea generation process in isolation to generate trade ideas.

We obviously use all of the entire pro-trader systematic process, and this is just a small part of it.

estimate ranges by understanding positive and negative skew of means versus midpoints by understanding estimate upgrades or downgrades in the near past by understanding the current

ratings distribution from analysts and understanding how that has evolved over time in the near past.

You are getting a handle on the there is room for upgrades, downgrades, or indeed ratings

changes in the future that may provide future catalysts. You are understanding and identifying

more important qualitative parameters for the stock itself. So in the future, if you have a position in the stock,

you can digest news that's coming out far more effectively. So for example, with Abercrombie

and Fitch, if you went through all of this analysis, if you recall, we had $1.50 of earnings per share as an estimate from the market for 2022.

We know that the current distribution of analyst ratings is skewed towards a hold rating, but it's somewhere between a hold and a buy rating.

And we know that the current stock price is 37.49

and the average price target for analysts

on a very wide range is 37.49.

is $34.11. So what happens if we have a position in this stock and the company guides to an EPS

number for 2022 when they report their quarterly earnings in 2021? What if they guide their 2022 number to $1.75. Well, we are on top of everything and we know that analysts

are going to have to upgrade the stock in response. They're all going to also have to up their

estimates and up their price targets and the stock is going to go up a lot.

So in terms of qualitative processing, you've just got to be on top of research analyst estimates

and the range of those estimates.

You need to be on top of the positive or negative mean consensus skew relative to midpoints.

You need to be on top of recent history or near-term estimates changes.

And of course, we like to see some evidence that we've got the wind blowing in the right direction. And you need to be on top of analyst ratings,

the distribution of those ratings,

how they've been changing through near past time,

the average rating in terms of the average

of the distribution, and also price targets.

All of this is going to keep you on top of the parameters

that you need to understand for the stock in the real world.

And moving forward through time, if you have a position on,

as the dynamic is changing, you're going to understand

how to digest all of this information as fundamental news comes out and these parameters move.

Now, we've obviously been through a lot in this video and the previous video on qualitative analysis.

So let's summarize everything here.

qualitative analysis. So let's summarize everything here. We obviously started with the most important thing, which is identification of KPIs. So again, we're not here going to give you the entire list of KPIs for every sector and subsector in the GICS or NAICS classifications.

This is just something that you're going to have to do for yourself by piecing the evidence together from annual and quarterly reports, company presentations, and

and earnings call transcripts,

and you need to do it on a case-by-case basis

until you get good at it.

When you start out, you're going to end up

with a full KPI list for a particular stock.

And by default, those same KPIs

are going to apply across the sector.

And as you've seen, once you've identified KPIs for a particular stock,

by default, you end up with an inferred management operating plan for the stock.

Now, not only KPIs for a particular stock, an inferred management operating plan, and also KP of research analyst estimates, ranges, and ratings.

So adding on all of this qualitative analysis to your quantitative analysis is absolutely essential,

guys. And obviously, you need to be doing this work yourself. You need to

be going through all of this yourself. Remember the ITPM principles, self-sustainability,

work ethic, free information, and working smart, not hard. So use videos 30 and 31 to achieve a full qualitative analysis when you're doing your work.

Use them as a template and use the case studies and apply the steps and processes on a case-by-case basis

until you build up your own database of KPIs.

And there's a discipline here to always remember.

When you're achieving a full qualitative assessment of KPIs and an inferred management operating plan,

and also the qualitative market dynamics,

Also, the qualitative market dynamics. Always refer back to valuation from your quantitative process and ask the question,

does the qualitative assessment support or deny valuation and my positive or negative outlier status

that I identified in the quantitative process when I selected

the stock to do work on.

When the qualitative assessment supports our positive or negative outlier status, we are

in business.

our trade idea is in business. We then do further work. If our qualitative assessment denies

our valuation status, our positive or negative outlier status, then we have a problem because

we are then clueless as to why valuation is where it is. And our potential trade idea breaks down.

We can't take positions in stocks, long or short,

simply because we've identified them as positive

or negative outliers in the quantitative phase

without understanding what is actually driving valuation and having a full handle on it

and have an expectation for the future. We need our qualitative assessment to actually support

our valuation. And then we are moving one step closer to having a full trade idea. So guys, those are the steps for the

qualitative analysis that we've covered in the last two videos. Let's go back to the desk for a recap.

Okay, guys. So welcome back to the desk once again. The last few videos, what did we look at? We looked

at qualitative analysis. So let's have a recap of what we looked at the last few videos. So the first

thing we looked at was KPIs, key performance indicators, and actually where to find them.

Primarily, we're going to get them at the Investor Relations website.

However, let's use a little bit of common sense here. We obviously go through an entire

quantitative process before we actually arrive at this stage at the qualitative analysis.

And by simply going through the quantitative process, we are obviously going to

pick up little tidbits of qualitative information as we go through that process. It's kind of

unavoidable. We are going to get some information that's qualitative along the way. The key here

is understanding the difference between a quantitative metric like revenue, earnings,

and anything that's a measure on financial statements, and a qualitative metric. So an

underlying business driver metric or measure. And when you actually understand that and understand the difference

and split them out properly,

your process just becomes more systematic.

So with KPIs, what are we doing?

We are looking under the hood.

We're looking under the bonnet of the car.

And what we have to remember all the time is that KPIs are an inference of the management operating plan, and the management operating plan drives future revenue and earnings.

So we go through this KPI identification process so we can put those metrics into the context of future guidance of revenue and earnings. And then we gauge whether

there's going to be an upwards or downwards revision of guidance for revenue and earnings.

Now, the investor relations website, that's not the only place where we can find KPIs. When you go

through the identification process, you can take an extra step

and go to the earnings call transcripts to fill in any missing blanks, any missing information

that you may have overlooked or may not be included on the investor relations website.

So we can go to past earnings call transcripts, go through them and

look for all the clues and pull out all the information and infer a management operating

plan from those KPIs. Now, of course, earnings releases and earnings call transcripts going

forward, they're very important for us as traders. And you're going to have positions over earnings

in the future. And you definitely want to be on top of earnings when they come out and be going

through them and also going through the earnings call and the call transcripts. Very, very important

because you're going to have positions over earnings.

So of course, you need to get used to this process of looking at earnings information

and earnings call transcripts, because that gives you practice to what's coming up in the future,

and it makes you better at processing them. If you have a current position going into an earnings

day, what's going to happen? The earnings

and the earnings call transcript information is just going to confirm or deny your fundamental work

and hence your current position. You're going to have to make decisions on the position

based on this information, based on revenue, earnings, and even the information from KPIs. And you're

either going to run the position, you're going to add to it, or you're going to trade out of the

position. Now, if you've got no position going into earnings, the information on the financial metrics,

so revenue, earnings, and additional financial measures, plus any discussion about the KPIs

that moves the needle of the KPIs.

If you have no position going into earnings,

what's going to happen?

You're going to decide whether you're going to have a position or not

after earnings based on that information.

So it's very important

to practice this stuff and just going through the process, the qualitative process, you'll

be better at identifying KPIs and whether the needle is going to move.

Also at the qualitative phase, we looked at management track record, the board of directors,

the quality of the board. We looked at insider stock and stock option ownership. And we looked at research analyst estimates, range, and ratings.

And for the qualitative info for management track record, board of directors,

stock ownership and stock option ownership,

what position you're intending to have is very important.

So what lens you're looking through when you're intending to have is very important. So what lens you're looking through

when you're assessing this information, this qualitative information. So for example, if

you're potentially looking to go long, what is your primary concern here? Your primary concern

is you want to make sure that there's no red flags in any of this qualitative information.

So red flags from management track record, red flags from the board of directors, and also the

stock ownership, option ownership, and recent trading in the stock and options. If you're

intending to go long and you start uncovering red flags, you obviously have to do

a bit more further work, do more of a deep dive on that information. And if that information

ends up putting you off being long, then that's totally fine. Just go through that process.

If everything agrees, however, that everything's okay, there's no red flags,

then it's probably going to be a situation where you move on to the next stage of the process.

On the short side, what are we looking for? What are we concerned with? Well, we actually,

if we're looking to go short a stock, we look at all of this information in the qualitative phase, and we uncover red flags.

That's great for us.

But if there's no red flags, it might make you think twice.

It's all situational.

You just have to go through it and figure it out.

For research analysts, the estimates, the range of estimates, and research analyst ratings,

and research analyst ratings, because we know that research analysts are essentially career-driven,

risk-averse, political animals, because we know that most of the time, their ratings, their price targets, they are lagging the stock price. So ideally, what we want to see when we look at this information, we want to see

that there's room for longs, for example, we want to see room for upside. And for shorts,

we want to see that there's room for downside. So for longs, we want to see that there's

room for upside, so upgrades. And for shorts, we want to see that there's evidence for downside,

so research downgrades. So when we go through this overall process, guys, the qualitative process,

what we're looking for, what we want to see is evidence that the qualitative assessment

supports our fundamental quantitative work. Okay? That's what we're going. That's what we're looking for

when we're going through this whole process. The information supporting on the qualitative side,

the quantitative work that we've already done. So go through the qualitative process. In addition to the quant process, it's very important that you do that.

Now, we're going to move on to the next stage of the PTM video series,

the next stage of the trade idea generation process.

It's a very, very important part.

We're now going to be looking at catalysts.

And catalysts is what sets apart a trade idea from an investment

idea. Very important to remember that as we move forward into the next section. So let's

go over to the next video and I'll see you back at the desk very soon. Thank you.