Okay, so we are back at the screen.

And what we're going to be looking at here in this video, this is our final video on trading psychology.

We're going to be looking at eliminating emotion and staying objective.

And this involves both preventative risk management and reactive risk management.

both preventative risk management and reactive risk management. So we're going to be having a look at both of those in the context of eliminating emotion and staying objective as a trader that

trades to a professional standard, a professional level. And what this really involves is treating

your trading account and treating trading overall as a business.

Now, it's been a while since we looked at the competency hierarchy, and so far, this is the

competency hierarchy that we've been looking at throughout the PTM video series. And what you

will have noticed with that is that institute traders,

so traders, retail traders that come to ITPM, take our online programs and then open a trading

account and then begin implementing what we teach with their own money, with real money.

Those guys, institute traders, generally are on average sitting between conscious

competence and unconscious competence. So overall, they are competent. And as at the time of recording,

we have about eight years of data of retail traders that have been through our programs

and opened a trading account and traded with their own money,

implementing what we teach.

And generally speaking, on average,

these guys are sitting somewhere between

conscious competence and unconscious competence.

So something that is absolutely for certain

is that they are not like retail traders outside ITPM that are going round in circles at the level of unconscious incompetence, where they've got no clue what they're doing, but they think they do, and they're engaging.

Retail traders there are engaging in a world of delusion, denial, and lies.

Now, they're definitely not also consciously incompetent,

so conscious incompetence at that level.

They've taken our online programs like the IPLT video series

and the PTM video series, and when they learn that information,

they know that they've done it wrong in the

past and now that they have

the right information to

enable them to continue learning

and apply the information

properly and then when

they get started when they open their trading

accounts they apply them

they implement with real money what they have learnt and they climb into the

level of competency but what we're going to introduce you to here now and this is

important to look at at this stage in the video series is a breakdown of

different levels of competency based on experience so right at the bottom of the

competency hierarchy we have our retail traders

engaging in bad behaviors and operating in a world of delusion, denial, and lies,

and continually losing money. We then have ITPM alumni. And typically what we see,

whether alumni who have taken our online programs choose to trade through ITPM infrastructure or choose to trade outside on their own, when they have greater than 12 months experience and a certain amount of trades under their belt, they begin to climb out of conscious incompetence and into the level of conscious competence.

But without question, within ITPM, because we have all of the data,

Institute traders who have been trading over a 12-month period

and have also got a certain amount of trades under their belt.

So they've gained a level of experience as a minimum of 12 months and a certain amount of trades over those 12 months.

They are sitting at the level of conscious competence at a minimum.

So they've done our online programs.

They've opened their trading accounts.

They've deposited money,

they've traded over a 12-month period, and they've had some level of minor success or decent success at a minimum.

So at this stage, they know how to do it right.

But on some occasions, they may need help still and continue to get real-world practice

implementing the knowledge.

Now, guys like this in ITPM

who have been trading greater than 12 months,

they've opened their trading accounts,

they've become an institute trader,

and they've got decent statistics,

and they're grinding out good results, positive profit,

so good P&L.

We refer to these guys in ITPM as Institute Traders.

So they've got the knowledge of applying it pretty well,

but they may still be in some areas of their trading, which is preventing them

from becoming at the level of unconscious competence. So the level of a professional trader where they

They can do it right by applying the knowledge that we teach, and they make really good returns,

make good money without even thinking about it too much.

So their processes are close to perfect or perfect.

They generate really high-quality ideas all the time.

And without thinking about it too much, they have really solid preventative risk management

and they know what to do in pretty much all situations in terms of reactive risk management.

So essentially, these guys, and we call these guys Institute Traders Tier 1,

these guys are getting consistent profitability by implementing ITPM processes, high returns, and they're pretty much doing it on autopilot.

traders tier one are sitting at the level of unconscious competence, the same level as professional traders, but the visual has professional traders above them within the unconsciously

competent level of the hierarchy. But the institute traders tier one, the only difference between those

guys and professional traders is really that professional traders are registered as professional traders and regulated by their domestic regulator in whatever geography they are in.

And they are registered to trade other people's money. So shareholder money if they're sitting at an investment bank or investor money

if they're sitting at a hedge fund. And the institute traders, tier one, are not registered

or regulated. They're trading their own money. But other than that, there is essentially no difference

in the approach that they're taking. And their ability to generate a certain amount of return

consistent out of a sense of risk.

Both institute traders at tier one

and professional traders are taking the same approach,

so the same input, and they're getting the same output,

and they engage in all of the same behaviors.

Now, the reason why it's important

to look at this at this stage is because you have to understand right now, having done the PTM video series

and also other online programs at ITPM like the IPLT video series and the Professional Options Trading Masterclass.

You have to understand

at this stage where you sit

in the hierarchy

and what needs to be done

to get you from that level

so you continue climbing

the hierarchy. And when you

think about where we've come from right at the beginning of the video series up to this point

where we've gone through the entire trade idea generation process, and now we've arrived at

psychology and risk management, we can now put all of this together to come up with an entire

educational development plan. Because climbing the competency hierarchy and getting to a

professional trading standard as a retail trader really involves getting the right information

and internalizing it, knowing it really well inside out. So that's the theory. That's the

educational theory. Then putting it into practice with real money,

so implementation, and then not just implementing it, but implementing it successfully and consistently

over a period of time and a certain amount of trades at a minimum, and gaining the experience,

minimum and gaining the experience, the real world, real money experience, so you can feel very comfortable that you've become highly competent at this endeavor we call trading.

So right now, you would be classed if you are coming into ITPM and you've just taken the professional trading masterclass,

you would be classed as ITPM alumni under 12 months. So you are sitting at the level of

conscious incompetence. So if we go back one screen and just look at the definition here,

back one screen and just look at the definition here. So at the level of conscious incompetence, it means that you now know that you're doing it wrong and you have the right information to enable

learning and application. So the good news is that you are no longer unconsciously incompetent.

you are no longer unconsciously incompetent. You've woken up and you've become conscious.

However, the key here in that definition of conscious incompetence, the key word is application.

You have to now implement to enable yourself to get to the level of conscious competence.

And if we look at the details here of what makes an institute trader consciously competent,

it involves implementing successfully everything that we've covered in the PTM video series

and the IPLT video series up to this point.

And this provides you with your next target.

So let's have a look at these. Firstly,

understanding risk versus opportunity, so fully understanding volatility and how to calculate it.

Targeting a 50 to 100 percent return with approximately

a 20% and if possible above 20%, 20% plus annualized portfolio risk. Knowing the difference

between a trade idea and an investment and having a constant flow of high quality trade ideas.

Someone who is at the level of conscious competence is also going to be highly competent at timing the 20 to 60 day trade entry and exit process and also very competent at optimal trade structuring.

And this would also involve being competent at trade structuring options structures.

So yes, for you to be charging your way up the competency hierarchy

towards professional level standard or professional level status,

it really is unavoidable.

At some point, you're going to have to become competent at trading options.

Now, somebody at the level of conscious competence is also very good at building

long, short 20 to 60 day portfolios and doing it competently. You know, the action of going longer

stock and shorter stock, it's all pretty straightforward. It's the push of a button

on a keyboard. But just engaging in that action and building a portfolio by quickly buying six stocks

and shorting four stocks, you end up with a long short portfolio as a result, but it doesn't mean

you've done it competently. So execution in trading is also important and how you actually go

about building the long short portfolio is very important too. In addition, what we found is that

the vast majority, if not all, of institute traders sitting at the level of conscious competence have a very strong handle

on their trading psychology. They don't fall in love with market narratives and just as important,

they don't fall in love with their own internal narratives and they don't fall in love with their

positions. And that's because they do have a handle on their

trading psychology and engage successfully in preventative risk management and reactive risk

management practices. So they are managing the risk of their 20 to 60 day long short portfolio

very competently and controlling their psychology via

preventative risk management and reactive risk management practices. And on top of

that they're also beginning to understand or they're engaging in the

practice of treating their trading accounts

like a business. They are hitting the trading statistics that are necessary to run your account

as a business and therefore achieving self-sustainability and consistency in returns.

Now, the difference between consciously competent traders and unconsciously competent traders. So the level of professionals really just continues

to come down to experience and doing this on repeat over many trades over a long period of time.

So it's not like unconsciously competent or professional level standard traders are doing anything different to consciously competent traders.

It's just that they've got way more experience and they've been doing it longer.

So they can do everything that's on the screen there.

So everything above without thinking too much about it.

So they're in an autopilot situation. They just know

what has to be done and they execute what has to be done without even thinking about it. And it just

comes naturally. So it's essential at this stage, before you go into the real world and start implementing what you've learned with

real money, that you understand what success looks like in trading in terms of the skill sets that

you need in order to climb the competency hierarchy. And that's essentially what we have on the screen right here. The skill sets for conscious competence and then what's required to go up into the level of unconscious competence.

to the level of unconscious competence, i.e. the level of a professional trading standard.

It, of course, comes down to experience.

But what is key is that you have to understand that you have to treat trading and your trading account as a business.

And the only way that can really be done is by getting your psychology right and essentially

getting your head right.

So you can build your experience with real money and real-world implementation and you

know what to do in all situations and this is essentially called reactive

risk management or in other words staying in motion on your positions now

throughout your trading career especially in the beginning you're going to

coming across many different situations when positions present themselves as either winners,

losers, or flat or nothing positions in terms of outcome. And assuming two people have the

long-short portfolio management 20 to 60-day time horizon systematic process in place and they know all the theory, the difference

between somebody who is at the unconscious competence level and somebody who is at the

conscious competence level is the ability to have strong reactive risk management in place.

And the more situations you're exposed to and the better you

react to those situations by implementing reactive risk management and staying in motion on your

positions, this is just an internal database that we call experience. And the more experience you get, the more likely you are to do

probabilistically the right things at the right times with positions in your portfolio.

So what we're going to do here as we're coming towards the end of the PTM video series,

as we're coming towards the end of the PTM video series.

And because the next step for anybody watching the PTM video series is actually to go and implement what you've learned,

we're going to highlight here scenarios that any trader would face

with positions in their portfolio and outline, by example,

how you should be thinking about those

positions and the correct mindset of how you deal with the situations. And this is really just about

getting your head right so your own individual reactive risk management when you're staying

in motion on positions doesn't just start off on the right path,

but it just gets better and better over time. So the first situation we need to think about

is what we call in the industry, when we have a position, a head scratcher. So a position that you have

and you're admittedly probably in the position for all of the right reasons,

but it's just confusing. You will often sit at your desk and stare at positions in your trading

account and wonder why something isn't moving. So you'll be asking yourself the question

many times in your career that you, for example, did lots of work on a long idea.

It never goes up. The stock has now gone against me. It's down 10% from where you bought it.

And asking yourself the question, what on earth should I do? Well, we looked at

preventative risk management situations in earlier videos. You can always have some sort of stop loss

in place, obviously. But remember, you are running a long, short portfolio, and there will be correlation

in your portfolio. So there is no one-size-fits-all rule book that applies to all situations all the time.

Every situation is dependent on its own merits.

So remember, there is no rule book here.

But one thing is for certain, just using the excuse,

like it's not working because the technicals didn't play out,

is really just a dumb excuse.

It's probably not going up because you've actually missed something

fundamental and or catalyst-driven. So it's probably not going up because of a lack of

catalysts or you've missed something fundamentally. And in reality, there's multiple options in how you treat this type of situation

versus just the binary make $3 or lose $1, the 3 to 1 ratio on a trade. The options in the way that

you treat a position like this are literally endless. And what you have to remember as well is that it's

just one position in the context of your entire portfolio. The outcome of your portfolio is way

more important than the outcome of just one position. And this is why you have to eliminate

all emotion and stay objective all the time on any position. Now, something else that we have to eliminate all emotion and stay objective all the time on any position. Now, something else

that we have to consider is something that we call a stomach churner. So when you've lost so much

money that you are actually sick to your stomach. So this is what we call in trading and portfolio

management, the catastrophic loss. So you just log in one day

into your trading account and your account is just down a massive amount of money. Now this can only

happen for a few reasons. First of all, it could be a situation that you just have far too much concentrated risk in one situation.

So you're actually not diverse enough in your portfolio.

So you didn't commit to actually building a portfolio.

Secondly, it could be the case that everything in your portfolio is just too highly correlated

and you've possibly topped and tailed the portfolio.

So what does that mean in the context of a long short portfolio?

Well, it could just mean that if the market goes up 10% and all of your longs and shorts went up between 10% and 12%,

20% that you had hard stop losses on all of your shorts and you got stopped out on all of your

shorts on the way up and now you're just naked long. So you only have your long positions remaining.

And then the market reverses and all of your longs go down. This means you've booked realized losses

on all of your shorts and realized losses on all of your longs. So essentially, what does that mean?

It means you've been hit with a double whammy. In that situation, everything was moving in the

same direction. You probably had decent diversity in your portfolio, but you had quite a bit of

correlation in your portfolio. Volatility comes into the market, all your stocks

go up, you get stopped out on all your shorts, and then all your stocks go down, and you get stopped

out on all your longs. And this actually may not be your fault. Of course, putting hard stop losses

on every single position doesn't really work in a long short portfolio. You have to have a hybrid

approach and assess every situation by its own individual merits. And of course, if you did that

and volatility came into the market, you might be a victim of the double whammy and it might

actually be your fault. But what about the situation where, for example, you walk in one day and all of your shorts are up and all of your longs are down?

Well, in that situation, it's just really bad luck.

You've done everything right, but you just got unlucky.

You've basically had what we call a three or four standard deviation day, where on the very rare occurrence, everything in your

portfolio or the vast majority of your portfolio just all goes against you all at once. So these

two situations, the head scratcher and the stomach churner are good examples where if you don't get

your head right, you don't get your psychology right as an amateur trader,

a retail trader starting out and going into the implementation phase. If you don't get that right,

you can end up struggling for a very long time, even though you've got a high level professional

standard systematic process in place. Even worse, if you continue to

have your head in the wrong place, you have bad psychology and bad preventative risk management,

and the actions that you take with your reactive risk management, even worse, you're just going to

blow up. Why? Because it's absolutely inevitable that you're going to

have situations like this all the time. It's inevitable when you're trading with real money

in the markets and building portfolios that you're going to always have at any one time. Winners,

losers, and positions that are kind of flat and doing nothing. So getting your head right,

having the right mindset and approach, and knowing the most probabilistic outcomes from your actions

is not only key to survival, but also absolutely key to you climbing to the highest level of the

competency hierarchy, unconscious competence, and the

professional trader standard level. So let's think about these things in terms of getting our head

right in terms of outcomes when we have different situations happening to positions in our portfolio

at any one time. So there are literally only three outcomes that can occur

with a position. There can't be any other outcome on a position other than these three outcomes.

So straight away, this should give us some sort of comfort in knowing that there's absolutely no

more outcomes than these three situations.

It's not like trading is astrophysics or particle physics.

It's not rocket science.

We've just got to understand it and know how to deal with it.

And it's actually beautifully simplistic.

So on the slide here, you can see the three outcomes.

And what we've done here is highlighted in red what retail traders generally do and highlighted in purple what professional traders usually do. So firstly,

a big loss on a position, a catastrophic loss. What does a retail trader typically do when they

see a position go against them wildly? Well, generally speaking,

most or all retail traders will just be very scared. Why? Because they just don't know what to do.

And what retail traders typically do in this situation is they just freeze like a rabbit in

the headlights. So not even taking an action on the position at all,

and therefore pulling from box A, and even worse, trying to add to the position and average down

with a losing position in the hope that they can get back to break even because they're so scared

and they're so panicked. With professional traders, this just doesn't happen. Why? Because

we know there's a multitude of actions that we can take to limit losses and to control the damage

and come out of the situation doing not too bad out of it. So we would usually have our

preventative risk management practices in place to make sure

that we are protected from a catastrophic loss, but also due to experience, having been involved

in some situations like that in the past, we would have good reactive

risk management in place. And even though there's a multitude of things that we could do,

we just wouldn't panic and we'd assess all of the actions that we could take with a clear mind.

We don't panic. We don't get scared. And we just trade based on probabilistic outcomes.

So the catastrophic loss, the stomach churner for professional traders,

we know there's absolutely no need to ever be scared or panic because no one single position

can really kill us. We construct our portfolios to absolutely minimize the probability that a

catastrophic loss can occur. And for us in the first place,

because we have preventative risk management practices in place, we know that it's extremely

unlikely that we're going to have a catastrophic loss in our portfolio at all. And that if we do

have a three or four standard deviation day where everything just goes against us

because it really is unavoidable to take away all risk from your portfolio

from a catastrophic loss,

we understand that if it happens,

it's definitely down to really bad luck.

And even in that situation,

we wouldn't even be scared or panicked. We would just do the right

thing to make sure we're trading tomorrow. And that is just about capital preservation.

Now, what about situations? So our second outcome here where we're just wrong on a position. Well,

even if it's not a catastrophic loss at the individual stock level or the

overall portfolio level, retail traders, if they're wrong on a position, will generally

be scared, confused, and panicked. Whereas professional traders would just never panic,

even if they're wrong on a position. We would just engage in the right risk management practices at the

preventative level, where if we were wrong on a position, it definitely couldn't hurt us too much.

And also, we'd engage in reactive risk management practices. So taking actions on the position,

given new information in the market, and the move in price, and just limit the damage that the position

can do to the outcome of our portfolio. But the key here is that we just don't panic. We look at

things very clearly for what they are. We eliminate emotion. We stay objective, and we just do

probabilistically the right thing. Now, what about our third outcome

where we're actually right on a position?

Well, retail traders, unfortunately,

engage in euphoria when they're right on a position.

And even when retail traders generally are experiencing

euphoria because they're right and they have a winner, something's moved in their favor and

they're making good money on a position, they are still essentially scared, confused and panicked.

Why? Because generally speaking, they're not used to it. And secondly, because the number that

they're looking at can be meaningful to them, especially if they've had a lot of previous losses.

So they get scared, confused, and panicked, and then engage in box B behavior.

So taking profits on a winner too early.

With professional traders, even with a winner, we're never going to be scared, confused, or panicked.

We don't, in that situation, engage in emotion.

We never panic, and we remain objective.

And similar to when we're wrong on a position, we take a probabilistic approach,

and we take the right actions for the situation that we are in.

So to avoid all of these psychological problems of being scared,

confused, and panicked, and then because of those psychological problems causing us to do stupid

things, we put measures in place to stop us being psychologically weak, as in human. Why? Because psychological weakness leads to bad decisions,

which leads to losses.

So immediately from the outset,

before going into the implementation phase,

you have to absolutely learn to become agnostic.

You have to be able to learn how to eliminate emotion from your thought processes

when trading and introduce total objectivity to your psychology. So whenever you're struggling

with your psychology and actually before you even go on to implementation, you should engage in this psychological meditation

because it will just help you put everything into perspective. It will get your head in the right

place. It will help you eliminate emotion and stay objective so you engage in good trading

behaviors instead of bad trading behaviors.

Therefore, in all situations, over time, increasing your probability of making money

and decreasing the probability of losing money over time.

So just think about the planet.

Think about Earth.

It's approximately 4,540,000,000 years old.

And human ancestors date up to about 6,000,000 years old.

Our species, the human species, is approximately 200,000 years old.

And if we take a generation to be 25 years, that gives us 8,000 generations.

Now, modern civilization is only around 6,000 years old, so this is about 240 generations.

And if you think about how long humans have been around in the context of the history of the Earth,

the history of human ancestors, and even when you think of your own

place in that history, and not just in the history of the earth and the history of human ancestors,

but also within the context of human history itself with our own species, your existence

amounts to a tiny piece of nothing. So now think about the context of you

going into the financial markets to put on a trade or take a trade off, as in to take an action in

the financial markets. Think about that in this context. It is a totally meaningless action. So just think of the approach that many amateur traders,

many retail traders engage in,

and think about it in that context,

in the history of the earth, the history of human ancestors,

and the history of the human species,

and just think about how ridiculous those actions are

or the approach that amateur retail traders take.

For example, why would you ever think that you're going to go into the financial markets today

and buy a stock at the bottom, then sell it at some point in the future at the top?

Why do amateur traders and even amateur investors, why do they act human?

Why do humans always think that they found something that's going to change the world

and then they end up falling in love with positions? Does the financial market care that you as an individual in the entire history of earth, does the market care

about what you bought and the price that you bought it at? No, of course not. The market doesn't care.

Additionally, if you think you're going to go into the financial markets and pick the bottom

and pick the top,

you're totally delusional.

And if you fall in love with stories and narratives,

thinking that the stock position that you have is in a company,

that's got a product or service that's going to change the world, and you fall in love with positions,

and you just don't have the right mindset and headspace to actually

be an effective trader.

We never expect to buy the bottom and sell the top.

We never fall in love with narratives and fall in love with positions.

and we know that the market doesn't care about what price we bought something

and what price we sold it at.

Once you have a position in a stock, it's just a ticker that you trade.

And you've bought the position in the stock with a man-made invention.

Money, the stock itself, is a man-made invention. Money, the stock itself, is a man-made invention. You're essentially

just using fun credits to make your life slightly better whilst you have your time on earth.

So just don't get emotional at all about anything. Just don't get emotional about positions and fall in love with them.

Always stay objective.

You should just never, ever get emotional about anything in trading financial markets.

Why? Because in the context of the history of Earth, the history of human ancestors and our own human species, it's all just meaningless. And once you

understand that, you never ever have a reason to be emotional in any situation in trading,

and you are going to remain calm and objective in all situations. So if you're ever worried,

situations. So if you're ever worried, you're ever scared, panicked, and confused, then you should engage in this psychological meditation where you just first of all either lie down on the floor

or imagine yourself lying down on the floor. And then in the first step, raise above yourself,

out of your body, and just look at yourself lying on the floor.

And then just zoom out.

So zoom out where you can be above yourself, looking down at the neighborhood that you're in.

Then zoom out again to look down at the city that you're in.

Then zoom out again to look at which country you're in, then continue

to zoom out into space and just imagine the Earth and how small your country, your city,

your neighborhood, and you actually are. Then zoom out to the solar system and imagine where Earth is placed in the solar system.

Then zoom out even further and imagine the galaxy and the place of the solar system within our galaxy.

Then after you've held that thought for a small amount of time, zoom all the way back.

zoom all the way back. So firstly, back to the solar system, back to earth, back to your country,

back to your city, back to your neighborhood, and then back into your own body.

And I promise you, if you engage in this psychological,

meditation, when you are feeling scared, panicked, or confused in any situation in financial markets,

when you open your eyes, log into your trading account, and you look at the situation that you're

involved in, in front of you with your eyes, you will see the situation in a totally different light.

Why? Because you'll have a clear head. You will know that being emotional,

being scared, confused, and panicked is totally pointless because it's meaningless,

and that all you have to do is take the right actions for that particular situation that you

are in, in that moment in time, in the history of the earth. And that being

emotional about it just will not serve you for the optimal outcome. So eliminating emotion and

staying objective in all situations in financial markets is very, very important. And you have to really learn how to harness this skill set

of eliminating emotion and staying objective all the time. And if we're going to play this game

called trading the financial markets, we just have to accept some absolute truths of reality and stay objective around those truths.

So one of these truths is when we go into the market and we are potentially buying or selling

a stock, we need to just accept that we're actually going to be down instantly. We're

going to be losing money straight away. That's because when

we enter the market, we are buying on the offer and we are selling or shorting on the bid side.

And then our P&L is marked on the other side of the spread. So if the spread in a stock is $25.72 to $25.73, we are buying at $25.73 or we are shorting at $25.72.

If we are buying or going long at $25.73, our P&L is now marked live at $25.72. If we are shorting the stock at $25.72, our P&L

is now live and marked at $25.73. So we just have to accept that it's a fact of life. As soon as we

take a position, we should expect to be down. On top of that, we should always have realistic expectations that we should never think

to ourselves that we are actually ever going to pick the bottom when going long or pick the top

when we're selling out of a long or going short. We should just accept the reality that

and the truth of financial markets, that when we enter a position, we are just going to be down

immediately and we should never expect that we're going to pick the bottom or pick the top.

Another truth that we acknowledge is that our trading account is simply a business.

We expect losses to occur all the time, as well as profits.

But overall, we just want our gains to be higher than our losses.

And this is how our business becomes profitable.

We also admit to ourselves that our trade ideas, even though we've put a ton of work into them, they may not work in the time frame

of 20 to 60 days, and we just don't get emotional about it. And we just admit that once we have a

position and the position is live, that it's just a ticker on the screen and a price on the screen that moves around.

And if it doesn't do what we want it to do, we don't get angry about it. We don't get emotional

about it. We don't cry or throw our computer monitors across the room. The stock that we have

a position in is just a stock trading over the 20 to 60 day time period

in the four and a half billion year history of the earth.

It's meaningless and there's no reason ever to be emotional about a position.

When we have to deal with a loser, when we lose on a position,

we just accept that we're not going to get emotional

about it and we're not going to go back into the market to fight for our money back. So we're

engaging in what we call revenge trading. The stock doesn't care what price you bought it at,

what price you shorted it at. The stock doesn't care whether you've made money or

lost money. From the two parties between a human and a stock, it can only be the human that cares.

And you're only going to care if you don't treat your trading account like a business and you get

emotional about a stock position, you lose and you try to get revenge on the stock. The problem

is the stock just doesn't care. In that situation, it's highly likely that your emotion is going to

lead to really bad decisions and you're just going to lose more money. Another truth of financial

markets that we simply just have to deal with is that we have to understand

that we have to take risk in order to get opportunity.

And we are actually on top of it.

So we understand the risk that we're taking and the opportunity that this risk presents.

Why? Because we're intellectually honest with ourselves about the risk and opportunity within our time horizon.

And lastly, we have to be greedy. We have to admit to ourselves that when we're right, we have to choose to be greedy.

But at the same time, we have to walk a tightrope where we also are not afraid to take profits.

tightrope where we also are not afraid to take profits. After all, we are running a business,

so we have to realize profits. We have to bank our profits. So understanding these home truths about financial markets is going to help you move from conscious competence to unconscious

competence because you're treating your trading account as a

business. If you think about our three outcomes of a trade and then look at the results, the five

results of those three outcomes, we can look at them in the context of a typical retail trader

and also in the context of a typical professional trader.

So this movement from conscious competence to unconscious competence becomes easier,

because even if we didn't tell you this information, you would soon find out yourself for real.

But to avoid bad situations, or at least to minimize them on your educational pathway

during the implementation phase,

it really doesn't take much effort for us to highlight these situations to make the pathway easier.

So when a retail trader experiences a catastrophic loss, what happens? They just lose lots of money quickly.

What happens? They just lose lots of money quickly. It gets realized. The business, the trading account, takes a massive hit, and there's no way back. Additionally, retail traders are much more susceptible to the catastrophic loss because of all the behaviors they engage in from the outset, as in not even having a systematic process in place. Next outcome, you were just wrong on a position, and this leads to two situations for retail traders. Either they have a stop loss in

place and they lose a predetermined amount of money, so they're pulling from box B, but in the

vast majority of situations, and this is why retail trader statistics are so bad,

or one of the main reasons is they will pull from box A and lose a non-predetermined amount that could lead even further to a catastrophic loss.

Either way, generally speaking, when we looked at this outcome, because retail traders are generally

uneducated, blind,

trading blind, and don't have

a systematic process in place,

they will be scared,

confused, and panicked.

And generally speaking, they will

lose a non-predetermined amount

because they choose more risk and seek to fight the market.

Next outcome, you are actually right on a position and you're actually making money.

Well, retail traders, there's two outcomes for any trader.

But retail traders, we can either have a predetermined amount that is made,

so there can be a hard target, or there can be a non-predetermined

amount that could actually end up leading to massive gains. And this would be a situation

where there's a soft target in place with a trailing stop that's being run. Now, what would be the most typical situation for a retail trader? Well,

it's probably going to be the box B scenario where they're going to make a predetermined amount.

Or even worse, which is extremely typical of retail traders, is that the stops and the targets are set at levels given the volatility of the asset in place.

The stop is set at a realistic level given the time frame that they're trading and the volatility of the asset.

And the target is set at an unrealistic level.

So when they have a winner in their portfolio, the stock very rarely reaches their target.

Losers always reach the stop loss very quickly.

And winners very often turn into losers and hit the realistic stop loss within the timeframe.

Plus, they're always in a situation where the quality of their ideas is so low that a very high percentage of their positions

just end up being losers and they get stopped out.

But even in the vast minority where they end up in a situation where they have a winner and it hits their target,

the target is a hard target and they're taking profits too quickly.

There is obviously also the situation where, for example, they have a winner in their portfolio.

The target is very unrealistic. It never actually gets there, but they do roll the stop loss and

then the winner turns into a small winner. But this small winner is nowhere near enough to

offset all of the losers combined. So with these three outcomes and the five results, retail

traders, when they have these three outcomes, engage in the incorrect behaviors which lead over time over many trades to just bad results.

Now with professional traders, the five results for professional traders, things are just different.

Why? Because we admit to ourselves all of the truths of financials.

markets and trading. We put our preventative risk management measures in place. We have solid

reactive risk management practices, and we never get emotional, and we always stay objective,

and we seek to take the right action at the right time in the situation that we find ourselves in.

So the first outcome, the catastrophic loss. What's the result here for professional traders

and why does it differ to retail traders? Well, firstly, it happens a lot less. Why? Because we're

eliminating the probability of this happening as much as possible through diversification.

So only a three or four standard deviation

event can actually make this happen which means it's just down to extremely bad

luck additionally if it does happen because we've been involved in some of

these situations throughout our careers we don't panic we don't get emotional

we stay objective and we just do what we have to do.

The next outcome where we're actually wrong on a position, rather than being scared, confused and

panicked and getting emotional about it, we stay objective and we take the approach of handling

the situation with as much care as possible. And our outcomes are different because of preventative risk

management and because of reactive risk management. But most importantly, what sets professional

traders apart at the unconsciously competent level to traders operating at conscious competence

is how we actually react to these situations. So, reactive risk management.

So, by handling with care, this outcome where we're just wrong on a position, we aim for two results.

Instead of losing a predetermined amount or a non-predetermined amount that ends up leading to a catastrophic loss.

We take actions to prevent that and we get two results typically.

We either book a small loss so we're losing a little bit of money

and this is achieved, generally speaking, by just unwinding the position sensibly

and by making some money back through our actions.

Secondly, if we've done this really well and we've traded well out of the position,

we can actually get out for flat or even make a small amount of money from a bad situation.

So when we are wrong on a position, we generally don't have a predetermined amount

that we lose. And we certainly don't have a non-predetermined amount that we lose that can

turn into a catastrophic loss. We've just been doing it for so long and have good experience with

We know what to do. We know and recognize when we're wrong on a position and we get busy and we take action.

Next up, the outcome of when we're actually right on a position.

We have a winner in our portfolio. We're up. We're making money and we're feeling vindicated and confident.

With this outcome, we are generally aiming and we typically get two results.

Firstly, because we know we're running a business and realized P&L is important,

we can book a decent amount of profit along the way,

but we maintain a small position so we can make even more.

Or secondly, we can book a decent amount of profit along the way,

and we can actually go bigger in the position at a combination of more advantageous prices

and or at a better time. And then with the position that we have, the new position, we would roll our stop loss.

And that stop loss would protect all or very close to all of the profit that we've realized to that point.

So the point here about the outcomes and the results is that they are very different between professional traders and retail traders typically.

So for the catastrophic loss, it's very, very unlikely that it's going to happen to professional traders

because of all of the measures we put in place.

And even if it did happen, we can handle it.

With retail traders, typically it's going to happen a hell of a lot more.

And when it does, they just can't handle it.

When professional traders are wrong on a position, so we have a bad outcome, so we're just wrong,

we either lose a little bit of money or get out for flat or even make a small amount of money from the bad situation.

With retail traders, they're either losing typically a predetermined

amount because of a stop loss or a non-predetermined amount that can lead to a catastrophic loss.

When it comes to being right, when we have a winner, professional traders from this outcome

tend to get two results. We either book a decent amount of profit and we continue to make

more money on the position by maintaining a smaller size position, or we book a massive profit.

Because after booking a decent amount of profit along the way, we go back into the position and

we go much bigger. With retail traders, they're either booking a predetermined profit and usually down to

a combination of lots of bad ideas and very few good trade ideas and setting unrealistic

targets for retail traders.

those hard targets are actually very rarely met. And even if they are or their rolled stop loss

gets triggered, the winners, the dollar amount on the winners doesn't cover the dollar amount

of all of the losers combined. So you can really understand here the difference of the outcomes and the results for professional traders relative to retail traders because ofively, the outcomes of the catastrophic loss

simply being wrong on a position or being right on a position lead to very different results.

And this is why it's so important to make sure that you have risk management practices in place in order to be sitting in the level of conscious competence,

and also to build up a large amount of experience of trading many situations over a long period of time

to build up a more sophisticated risk management approach in practice so you can get into the level

of unconscious competence, so the level of the professional trading standard.

Because the actions that professional traders engage in on a weekly, monthly basis are generally

more sophisticated than the binary outcome of simply losing one and making three.

So hard stop losses and hard targets.

And it's really only possible to engage in these actions on autopilot unconsciously

once you've built up a lot of experience.

Another option, of course, to get

better at these situations, at these actions quite quickly, is to simply have a professional trader

sitting with you or sitting on your shoulder and showing you how to do it. And unfortunately,

this is only something that can be done in practice because everything is situational depending on the situation that you're in at the time in a particular stock.

And there is an infinite amount of actions that can be taken.

video series, and there is no such thing as a rule book which tells you what to do in all situations, all the time, in every stock, forever. So the way ITPM solves this issue

is through mentoring programs. Obviously, you would learn a hell of a lot more than justice

on a mentoring program, but reactive risk management is covered. So if you do struggle with this or you want to obtain this skill set as quickly as possible,

then you should absolutely consider a mentoring program with one of the ITPM senior trading mentors.

But if you are going to join the institute as an institute trader or you're going to go off alone by yourself

outside ITPM, that's okay. You're going to build up the experience over a number of trades over a

period of time, 12 to 18 months, 100 to 150 trades. And hopefully the penny is going to drop at some point

and things will fall into place where most of the time

you take the right actions at the right times

and you learn to get the results of professional traders

from those three outcomes.

Just make sure that you go over all of the trading psychology videos and the preventative

risk management practices and just make sure that you've got your head and psychology in

the right place and your PRM, your preventative risk management in place and your reactive

risk management actions will come over time with experience and you've just got to stick at it.

So in terms of preventative risk management, just running through a quick example, if you have a 10 position portfolio, let's say with five longs and five shorts that are equally weighted, what happens if one position goes against you by a large amount, let's say 50%?

Well, that in your portfolio is going to be a negative 5% portfolio performance.

If it goes against you 100%, then it's going to be a negative 10% portfolio performance.

And this is totally recoverable.

So you're just making sure sure that you're diverse enough. Where in the situation,

one position goes wildly against you, you are still in a totally recoverable scenario.

So diversification goes a very long way to eliminating the catastrophic loss. You've also

got to make sure that you have low correlation and or even some negative

correlation across ideas, but overall a low positive correlation for your portfolio. So it's

going to require a three or four standard deviation event that is going to hurt you, which is going to be highly improbable, highly unlikely. What this does

is it eliminates the chances, eliminates the probability that you're going to panic when

there's market moves that are quite sizable. So it's going to stop you topping and tailing

the portfolio. You just won't need to panic ever. So this all in combination in terms of PRM,

it removes the possibility of the catastrophic loss, and it also minimizes the psychological

downside that leads to bad decisions and continual losses. And by the way, these preventative risk management practices,

when you put them in place, it can totally be achieved without the need to give up the upside.

As you've seen in previous videos in the PTM video series, mostly covered by Chris, you can still

take calculated risk in your portfolio by choosing the level of risk that you want

within the framework, and you can still post great risk-adjusted returns.

Now, when it comes to reactive risk management, this is something, if you choose to go alone,

that you're going to just have to pick up yourself over time with experience.

that you're going to just have to pick up yourself over time with experience.

And as we've seen, the differences between pro traders and retail traders in this respect are numerous. And the most startling difference is always how losers and winners are treated or traded by professional traders relative to retail traders.

by professional traders relative to retail traders.

Obviously, professional traders have got a lot more experience in how to contain losses and maximize winners through trial and error

over many years of real trading with real money in real situations

over and over again on repeat.

And whether it's how we treat losers or how we treat winners,

what we call this in the industry is staying in motion. And what we're doing here is that we're

always playing the probabilities, not the possibilities. There's a very big difference

in financial markets and outcomes in financial markets with portfolios and positions between what is possible and what is actually probable.

And when we pro-traders are actually taking actions on our positions, we are taking actions based on what is probable, not what is remotely possible. And yes,

we don't obviously get everything right all the time with our actions. But if we're taking a

probabilistic approach over many situations, over a long period of time, with our three outcomes,

we're going to get better results. So if you are going off by yourself, whether that's

outside ITPM or becoming an institute trader, you've got to understand to take the approach,

the probabilistic approach, not trading remote possibilities. And the

difference in psychology is really twofold. Firstly, with fundamentals, because we as pro

traders, we do our fundamental homework, we know why a stock is moving. So we know it's because of

the fundamentals and it's not down to something random, like an excuse like the technicals didn't

play out. So in a winning situation, we are much more

confident to run the position or in a losing situation, we're much more confident in staying

in motion if necessary. Secondly, we just never have a situation where we're sick to our stomach,

where we have stomach churners and we're just never married to positions. Why? Because we know

that going into every position, it doesn't matter what it is, that we're going to treat all positions

in the same way, and we just don't get emotional or get tied to narratives or stories when we're either up on a winner or down on a loser. So just having the right

psychology in place really helps with your reactive risk management, even if you're just

starting out and going it alone. So just make sure that your psychology, your head is in the right place when you start trading,

when you start implementing what you've learned in the PTM video series.

And you're taking the approach of trading your account as if it's a real business.

You have to make sure that when you go into this, that you're on the front foot and that you're willing

to stay in motion on your positions because you are running a business now. Your trading account

is a business. You can't be in a situation where you just stare at positions and do nothing. You will have to take action on your positions. So essentially, you will

have to continually stay in motion. This is something that is unavoidable in financial markets

and trading financial markets if you want to get to the professional level standard of trading.

professional level standard of trading. So how do we actually go about staying in motion? Well,

assuming that you have good diversification in your portfolio, good ideas, you've got controllable position sizes, and you're executing at decent prices, how do we actually go about actively

trading a long short portfolio? Well, again, there's no hard and fast rules here,

but there's just common sense guidelines

and best practices or parameters

that you're probably going to be adhering to.

So we are operating in the 20 to 60 day time horizon,

And it really depends on many variables, but the outcome of a position starts to become known generally in the first month when we have the position on, so around 20 days.

it depends on the catalysts in that situation. But when things start to play out, the position is either going to be a clear loser or a clear winner, or it's going to be somewhere in between.

So what we call a nothing position. And if you're going to stay in motion effectively and run

your account as a business, you have to understand that in our trading statistics,

we will always have an unrealized P&L and a realized P&L. And in the next section of the

PTM video series, Chris Quill is going to go through a lot of these trader statistics with you.

But for now, just understand the difference between unrealized P&L and realized P&L.

Your unrealized P&L is all of your live positions in your trading account that are what we call marked to market.

So your P&L is marked at the last price of each stock that you have a position in. The point is, is your unrealized P&L is not real because you still have

the positions on and you haven't taken them off yet. When you take them off, they become realized.

So when you take a position off, your P&L is crystallized. So with losers beyond, say, around

40 days, we're probably starting to wonder if our margin in our trading

account is better spent somewhere else. So, in all probability, we're probably going to start

to take our medicine and we're going to book some losses or an overall loss on the position.

some losses or an overall loss on the position. And these losses are going to be realized in our trading account. So realized losses in our business. Now, how do we counter that so our business is

being run effectively? Well, with winners, we are banking profits along the way into the realized column, and we are keeping the cash register

ringing, and we're seeking to keep that realized column, the dollars in the realized column,

going higher and higher all the time, regardless of the fact that we're also booking some losses.

So even though we're booking some losses at the same time, we are seeking to keep

the realized column going up. And after we've taken profits along the way, banking those profits along

the way with winners to offset losses, we're going to be able to keep the realized column

We're generally seeking to potentially go back into winners or just move on to the next trade.

Now, it's important to remember that this is not an everyday thing.

Typically, what will happen is that your P&L bookings into the realized column are going to come in clusters.

And this tends to happen when there's some volatility around.

And this tends to happen when there's some volatility around, your stocks in your portfolio are moving around, and you'll do several trades all at once.

This is not an everyday thing.

Now, when you're staying in motion and you're running your trading business, so the realized column keeps going higher, and you're banking profits along the way out of winners to offset losers and overall on a net basis, you're booking a profit overall because of those actions.

If the only reason that you've come out of a winner is to make sure that the realized dollars

are going higher because you're booking a loss somewhere else.

Of course, it's highly likely that you're going to go back in at some point to the winner

after making sure that nothing has changed fundamentally, or the fundamentals have gone

in your favor further. The action of banking profits on winners along the way to offset

losers and more is an action in the industry that we call trading the P&L. And you want to be very

careful not to trade your P&L too often. Why? Because again, the stock doesn't care what price you bought and sold the stock at.

The stock is just going to do what it wants to do.

And in a situation where the stock continuously goes in the direction that you believe it's going to go in,

and it's presented itself as a winning position, it's more than likely going to continue on that trend.

it's more than likely going to continue on that trend. So you actually have to trade the stock,

but at the same time, not be reckless that you're never trading the P&L and not admitting that you are running a business. So we are constantly walking a tightrope between what we call trading the stock and also trading the account as a business.

And it's a fine balancing act to achieve in many situations over a long period of time.

It takes a while to get used to, but you'll just get it over time with experience.

So in this quite typical situation where you do have a winner in your portfolio and you're

banking profits along the way to offset the dollar losses from a loser and making sure

that overall you are booking a profit in the realized column, it is quite...

likely that you're going to go back in to the winner. So you're looking after your business

first and foremost, but then you're also trading the stock and not missing the opportunity to make

even more money on the winner. And of course, you're not in a rush. You don't have to go back

in immediately, just be opportunistic. Now, with nothing positions, those positions

where after a period of time, they haven't presented themselves as a clear winner or a

clear loser, they're just hovering around flat. We can actually be active here as well

in order to protect our downside, but we do most of the time keep the upside open just in case.

So in all situations, but in particular on these nothing positions, try to avoid trading on noise

like a piece of news flow that really doesn't mean anything for the stock. Just take this action solely for risk management purposes.

If you're taking the action of just trimming and booking small losses from what we call a nothing

position, it's totally okay. You're going to have other positions in your portfolio that are winners

that are going to offset these small losses. So don't worry about it. But at the same time,

you don't have to be extreme in these situations. You always have the choice of just having a smaller

position in nothing positions. Never close off all of the upside, the dollar upside potential

of a nothing position. Just get to a controllable size and be

a little bit more patient. Now, when it comes to running your trading account as a business and

going from the level of conscious competence up to the professional level of unconscious competence,

there are some absolute do not actions.

So these are the closest things in terms of reactive risk management.

These are the closest actions you will ever get to a rule book.

When it comes to losses and you're experiencing losses,

understand that you're running a business and you have an unrealized P&L and a realized P&L.

you're running a business and you have an unrealized P&L and a realized P&L. Just never take the action of only booking just losses. Always come out of what we call a booking flurry,

having made realized gains overall. And you have to do this even if it means taking off

a large percentage of your entire trading account. Because you're running

a business, you have to keep realized gains charging upwards. You can always go back into winners. So just

make sure you do not book only big losses. Once it's realized P&L, or in this situation,

a very big realized L, it can never be taken back because it's now realized. You have to seek

to offset it with winners. And if you're trading a spread trade, don't only book the losing side of a spread and run the winning

side. Why? Because you're making the loss realized and the winner, the profit is not profit. It's

unrealized. And you open yourself up to the situation where you're booking a loss on the losing side of a spread,

you then run the winning side of a spread, and then the winning side of the spread turns into

a losing position, which means you lose money on both sides of a spread. After you've been in

the actual situation where overall you are up on the spread. A much better action

would be to book both sides of the spread where you take the loss and you take the gain,

and overall on a net basis, you are up. So your business, which is the realized P&L,

is actually up, and then you go back into the winning side of the spread.

So of course, we try as much as possible to stick to the principle of trading the stock and not the P&L.

However, we have to just admit to ourselves that our trading account is a business

and we need that

realized P&L column always going up on a net basis. So we don't want to be reckless.

If you just find yourself in a situation where you're booking big losses over and over into your

realized column and you're hoping that your unrealized winners will pay even more in the

future, you're engaging in bad business practices for your trading account. This is a pathway,

a road that just leads to hell. As a trader portfolio manager, you need to protect your

realized P&L column with your life. Now, one of the biggest mistakes that we see at

ITPM is newbie traders, retail traders, even having taken our programs, not staying in motion

at all. And or people are choosing to stay in motion, but they're just doing it really badly.

are choosing to stay in motion, but they're just doing it really badly.

So reactive risk management and staying in motion, it's really a skill set in itself that you can only learn by doing it with real dollars over many trades, over a decent amount.

period of time. So the realities of this business and running a trading account is that you not

only need to turn yourself into a trade idea generation monster, you also need to get into

the really positive good habit of banking. You need to turn yourself into a banking beast.

yourself into a banking beast. And when you combine the two, being a trade idea generation monster and being a really effective risk manager, especially with reactive risk management

and becoming a banking beast, this in your business, your trading account leads to your

realized P&L always going up. and it means the cash register of your business

is ringing on a regular basis. Every time you're moving P&L from unrealized to realized,

you should just always remember the ring of a cash register. Cha-ching, cha-ching. Are you taking the right action and being up in

the realized column on a net basis? Are you putting dollars into the register or are you taking dollars

out of the register? You need to always keep the register ringing and you have to make solid and sensible decisions and play the probabilities, not the possibilities.

And just to hammer this point home,

we have here the visual of an actual cash register in a business.

And what's the cash register actually asking you to do?

The cash register is asking you to please put money inside me and please don't take it away. You are running a business here, guys. Okay, your trading account is a business and the actions that you take in your reactive risk management is really going to determine whether you're putting money consistently into that register or you're consistently taking money out.

Your realized column is your business.

It's your cash register.

Protect your realized column with your life and keep it charging upwards.

and keep it charging upwards. So of course, reactive risk management, staying in motion,

it can't be taught in a video series. It has to be done with real experience, with real money, and real positions. However, in the PTM video series here, what I've done in this video is try to set you off on the right path in the context of

psychology. In terms of teaching reactive risk management and doing this properly in practice,

it can really only be taught to the professional level on a trading desk or

or in a mentoring program with real money through demonstration.

We've done hundreds of mentoring programs down the years at ITPM,

and anyone who has done a mentoring program at ITPM will actually know this.

So at this stage, if you haven't done a mentoring program or you don't plan to,

then this, the reactive risk management and staying in

motion is a skill set that you're going to have to learn for yourself over a longer period of time.

On a mentoring program at ITPM, you'll be shown a lot of things, including reactive risk management,

and you will become consciously competent at everything, including reactive risk management, and you will become consciously competent at everything,

including reactive risk management within three months. But as with anything in trading,

the real test comes when you go off by yourself. And the only way you're going to be unconsciously

competent as a trader is if you can implement all of this by yourself without someone looking over your shoulder and

supervising you. If you make the decision to go alone outside ITPM or inside ITPM, that's totally fine.

But even as an institute trader, you will need 12 months and at least 100 to 150 trades behind you.

and at least 100 to 150 trades behind you. Now, at this stage, moving from theory into implementation, it can be quite daunting, but you just shouldn't be scared. You've learned

an absolutely huge amount of very valuable information, and you're getting to the stage now

where you are about to go into implementation stage, and you just shouldn't be worried because you've been

taught extremely well to a very high level. And especially if you pass the exam at the end of the

PTM video series, it means you've absorbed all the information, you understand it, and you're in a

very, very strong position to go forward into implementation. So you should feel confident. But it is hard work. This is where the hard work actually begins. And look, no one ever said this was going to be easy. Do you recall the four principles of the institute? Well, I'm not going to remind you again here for the sake of repetition. Please go and remind yourself again.

Financial markets and trading is a tough environment and occupation.

To become consistently profitable, you really do have to have the right information and then

apply yourself.

And you do have to work pretty smart to become consistently good. So don't shoot the messenger.

This is just how financial markets and trading them successfully over a long period of time

actually works. If you want to take shortcuts, that's totally fine by

us, you will just end up going back to the unconsciously incompetent level and you'll

just keep going around in circles and you'll just be back again at some point in the future.

We're getting close to the time now where you're about to move into implementation and

it's just time to make a choice.

You either continue on the road to becoming successful at trading to a professional level standard

and therefore keeping the educational momentum going,

or you decide to stagnate and not keep the momentum going and stay where you are at conscious incompetence,

or you reverse course and you end up being unconsciously incompetent

again. If your choice is to keep the momentum going, then yes, it's going to take some application

and you're going to have to implement based on the four principles of ITPM and just get your head down and grind out the results.

And speaking of results, coming up in the next section of the PTM video series,

Chris Quill is going to show you through trader statistics and metrics,

the results that you should be aiming for and also how to measure your performance as a trader so you are always on

top of your business, your business performance, your business statistics. But first, we've come

to the end now of our section in the PTM video series of trading psychology and risk management.

So let's summarize here. So when it comes to psychology, we looked at

human psychology and its flaws when trading financial markets. We also looked at some basic

preventative risk management practices. And we did this to understand why they actually exist. And we looked into them in the context of the 20 to 60 day

long short portfolio mandate. What we've also looked at here actually are the consequences of ego

and thinking that you know better than the market or you know something that the market doesn't.

So we looked at taking on the market,

and the result of that, we looked at the catastrophic loss. We also looked at the

differences between retail traders and pros when it comes to psychology and risk management

practices. And probably the biggest difference between retail traders and pro traders when it comes to risk management is ego.

Professional traders just don't pretend.

We recognize our ego, we acknowledge it, and we embrace it.

And we put measures in place to make sure we can do it.

to stop ourselves being egotistical when trading.

What's ironic is that retail traders in reality,

on the other hand, pretend to be humble,

and therefore they don't actually acknowledge their ego,

and they don't have any measures in place

to prevent their ego from destroying them.

So what's funny is that out there in the world is a perception that professional traders are very arrogant and have very big egos. You simply can't be successful at trading and be consistently profitable over time if

you actually have a big ego and you're arrogant.

And in reality, it's not professional traders who get those results over time who are the

ones with the big egos and who are arrogant.

Because to get the results, you have to acknowledge your ego and put measures

in place to prevent your ego from destroying you. It's just a human condition and professional

traders understand that they have to make sure they control it. The irony is that retail traders pretend or perceive themselves to be humble, yet in reality, they have the biggest egos.

They don't acknowledge their egos, and they don't put measures in place to control it.

And their egos and their human psychology end up destroying them.

destroying them. So guys, as you're moving forward into the implementation phase, just understand human nature, understand human psychology, and understand the difference

between that and trading psychology and why we have risk management practices in place.

And make sure you put measures in place to control your human psychology

and your ego. If you have any ambition to climb the competency hierarchy when you go into the

implementation phase and you're trading with real money, this is unavoidable. You are going to have

to learn how to do this in practice.

But as mentioned multiple times in this section of the video series,

the more you practice and the more experience you get,

the better you're going to get at risk management

and understanding the trading psychology versus human psychology.

So guys, we're going to move into the next section of the PTM

video series now. And Chris Quill is going to be showing you how to run your trading account

as a business. So how you measure your effectiveness, your performance, your

as a trader. So what Chris is going to be showing you are the measures by which you yourself

and outsiders judge your business so you actually treat your trading account as a business. Thank you.