Okay, so we just looked at our first survey, the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business.

So this is a great intro into our survey section of the PTM video series, because it highlights very clearly why, as traders, we use economic survey data.

And you can see that there's two main reasons we do this.

Firstly, for predicting the stock market direction and therefore GDP growth direction.

So we are focusing on our portfolio bias.

on our portfolio bias, okay? And secondly, clues to look for trade ideas

across various manufacturing sectors.

So we will later in the video series

be covering macro-driven trade ideas.

We'll do this later in the video series in more detail.

But for now, and in this part of the pro trader systematic process,

you will see that all surveys do provide both functions. So portfolio direction for stock market

direction and GDP growth direction and potential trade ideas. But we are going to focus in the next part of the video series solely on portfolio

direction. Now, overall, and taken together, so with money markets, cyclical commodity prices,

and of course, international surveys, what we're seeking to do here is we're seeking to build out what we call a macroeconomic or macro dashboard that allows

us essentially to know what is going on in the US economy in a lot of detail and enables us to

position our portfolios with a very high degree of confidence and a high probability of being right, which is the key. So we will

continue to focus on portfolio direction, portfolio bias, as we add each leading indicator to our

macroeconomic dashboard. And also you will have noticed when we looked at the ISM manufacturing, we looked at

some real world examples. We're going to continue to look at stock and sector examples as well

as we go through each leading indicator so we can put a

everything into context. Okay, so we're going to move on to our next leading indicator, the ISM

non-manufacturing survey. So we're going to be looking at the service sector. We treat it in a

very similar way to the ISM manufacturing survey for predicting stock market direction and GDP growth and hence our portfolio bias.

So each month, guys, be on top of the ISM manufacturing data and the ISM non-manufacturing

data when the surveys come out each month.

It's very important.

Use them in conjunction with all your other leading indicators and get smart about your time and work fast on what matters each month.

Don't get bogged down in too much process. Focus on what matters.

So let's get into the video and go over to the computer screen and I'll see you back at the desk in the next video.

Okay, so welcome to video number eight.

We're now going to continue with our analysis

into microeconomic surveys.

And we're going to be looking at the ISM non-manufacturing report on business,

or sometimes referred to as the ISM Services Purchasing Managers Index, or PMI.

Let's just run through a quick recap of what we've learned to this point in terms of leading indicators.

We have real interest rates, the yield curve, investment rate, and high yield or junk spreads over the 10-year.

We have our M2 money supply accessory.

We have stock market volatility, which was covered in the IPLT video series. And we continue our work with surveys.

We've covered the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business.

Now we're going to be covering the non-manufacturing report on business. So we're going to be adding the services PMI

into our leading indicator list in the category of surveys. So let's have a look

at the non-manufacturing index of services PMI. A preliminary report, so preliminary report, is published in the first week of each month.

And there's a final report that's published at the end of the month.

The link is on the screen there.

You can go to ismworld.org and search for the hospital.

ISM, non-manufacturing reports on business.

And the NMI is important.

Why?

Because the service sector represents 80% of the U.S. economy.

But there is a slight data drawback with it.

The composite data, so the aggregate data for the headline index, only goes back to January 2008.

So when we're analyzing the aggregate composite index and we're assessing business cycles, there's obviously a lot less business cycles that we can look at versus the ISM manufacturing report.

versus the ISM manufacturing report.

So purely from a historical data perspective,

the NMI naturally is less statistically significant than the ISM manufacturing index.

Now, some would argue that makes the ISM manufacturing index more important.

From a traders and PM's perspective,

and manufacturing index more important. From a traders and PM's perspective,

it's best to basically put an equal weighting on these.

Because the NMI covers the service sector

and that's 80% of the US economy,

it's very, very important.

It obviously is very important, even though at the aggregate

level we only have data going back to 2008. You'll see later in the video that actually

the components data of the NMI actually goes back to 1997. So from a traders and PMs perspective,

we basically, in level of importance, don't discriminate against the NMI just because it

has composite data only going back to Jan 08. We treat it as equal importance, if not more important,

than the ISM Manufacturing Index. Some in the market would argue the other way around,

but to be prudent from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective, we just put an equal weighting on both indices in terms

of level of importance.

The other thing that we have to consider is that it is in the service industry.

So this includes contracts.

It's non-physical or not real goods bought and sold, unlike the manufacturing index.

Also, in terms of composition, there's small differences in the makeup of the NMI versus the ISM manufacturing report.

But again, as traders and portfolio managers,

because the service sector represents such a big part of the US economy now,

we have to treat them in exactly the same way

when using them as a proxy for portfolio direction.

So when we're trying to ascertain

whether we should have a long, short or neutral bias in our portfolios.

short or neutral bias in our portfolios. Now, the NMI has four areas that are covered to make up the composite index. So there are four components with an equal weighting of 25% that make up the aggregate ISM non-manufacturing index. So we have business

activity, new orders, employment and deliveries, all with an equal 25% weighting that make up

the overall PMI for the non-manufacturing index. By far the most

important are business activity and new orders which we're going to come on to a

little bit later but the survey itself surveys 370 purchasing and supply executives in 18 service industry sectors.

Now, in terms of design of the survey, very similar to the ISM Manufacturing Index,

we are calculating a Diffusion Index.

So, the Institute for Supply Management calculates the service sector PMI as a diffusion index in the same way as the manufacturing index.

So they do this for the four subsurveys or indicators that have the equal weighting and then calculate the composite number.

and then calculate the composite number. So the respondents are basically indicating in the same way

that the manufacturing index respondents do,

whether particular activities,

so for example, business activity or even new orders

for their organizations have either increased, decreased,

or remained unchanged from the previous month.

Now, if you need a recap on how a diffusion index

is calculated, you can obviously go back

to the previous video where on the slides

that you see on the screen, you get a full breakdown

of how a diffusion index is calculated.

And the Non-Manufacturing Report on Business,

the Services PMI is exactly the same as the Manufacturing PMI

in that it's a diffusion index of the subcategories

and then the composite number

is calculated. Now, in terms of how we read it, it's again, pretty much the same as the manufacturing

index, just different sub-components. So in terms of expansion and contraction, the 50 level is our important level in the diffusion index and the composite index as well.

So we read the non-manufacturing composite PMI in exactly the same way in which we read the ISM manufacturing PMI.

A reading in the composite number above 50 indicates general growth, so expansion, in the services sector versus the previous month.

A reading in the composite number below 50 indicates contraction, so a general contraction in the services sector versus the previous month.

the services sector versus the previous month. And a reading of 50 itself indicates that there's no change in conditions from the previous month. Now, in terms of its usefulness,

as a leading indicator, it's great for traders and PMs to know what's going on in the US service sector in terms of expected future

expansion and contraction. And we can glean a lot of information from it. So it has a lot of

implications for traders, similar to the ISM manufacturing. So using it to predict US GDP growth and global GDP growth. So, a

general expectation of overall expansion and contraction in both the US and global economy.

We can use it to predict overall stock market direction and potential returns. So we want to know which way the wind is blowing,

therefore predicting US stock market direction and potential percentage returns of the stock market.

It helps us, of course, understand and potentially predict likely Federal Reserve policy.

Why?

Because the Fed is looking at this number as well.

We also get an appreciation and understanding due to our general awareness of overall expansion

or contraction and which way the wind is blowing, we also get

a bias, a potential bias in our portfolios, whether we should be running a net long, a net short or

or neutral portfolio.

Additionally, we get quantitative and qualitative information

of the industries that make up the services sector.

So, we can use that information to look at potential individual

single stock trade ideas for our portfolios.

Now, we never rely on simply one indicator or even

a few indicators to get our potential long, short or neutral bias in our portfolios when

we're predicting macroeconomic conditions in the future. So, U.S. GDP and stock market direction. And we also don't use one or just

a few leading indicators to try and get single stock trade ideas for our portfolios. We use them

all in conjunction with each other. So, the non-manufacturing report on business

can be used, obviously, and should be used

in conjunction with our money market leading indicators

that we covered in videos four to six,

and the ISM manufacturing report on business

and other macroeconomic indicators

that we're going to be covering

in the rest of the PTM video series.

We use them all in conjunction together

to get a very good understanding of the US economy,

money flows, and of course, potential Fed policy.

Now, in terms of survey design included in the diffusion index, we mentioned there's

four areas: business activity, new orders, employment and deliveries. We are going to

be focusing on by far the most important areas in this video, business activity and new orders.

Obviously, employment and deliveries are included,

but they're not as important in terms of leading indicators

because they are lagging within the index itself.

So the contribution that these four components make

to the overall Composite Index,

although they are equal at 25% each,

by far the most important contribution

from a traders and portfolio managers perspective

is business activity and new orders.

What's not included in the Diffusion Index, just from an educational perspective, and if

you have the time each month to go through them, they are worth going through to understand

the nuts and bolts of the survey itself.

and understand some of the responses that are occurring there.

There can be some useful information to be gleaned from that,

but nowhere near as important as business activity

and new orders that are actually included

in the Diffusion Index

and make a very important contribution

from a leading indicator and traders'

and portfolio managers perspective.

In your own time, you can self-educate on inventories, prices, order backlog, new export orders,

imports and inventory sentiment.

We're not going to be covering it in this video itself.

We're going to be focusing on, as I say, the most important numbers, business activity and new orders.

So remember, we're looking at the contributors here to the composite non-manufacturing purchasing managers index PMI.

And we're looking at the diffusion index and the most important ones contributing to that composite.

So business activity, what does it cover?

Well, it tells us whether business activity is increasing or decreasing overall in the U.S. service sector.

in the US service sector.

And then new orders reflects the level of new orders from customers of service sector businesses.

So the US service sector in its entirety.

So taken together, these two are the most important ones

because we're getting a general month-on-month comparison

of what is happening in terms of business activity

and new orders within the US service sector,

which remember is 80% of the US economy.

Employment is a lagging component of this survey

and will very likely follow business activity and new orders.

And supplier deliveries gives us an idea of the efficiency of the supply chain and can give us

an indication of the bullishness or bearishness of non-manufacturing or services companies on their supply chain

and the bullishness or bearishness of suppliers themselves on the supply chain.

But we have to remember that this is the service sector.

This is not physical goods bought and sold.

not physical goods bought and sold. So from a trader's portfolio manager's perspective, because the supply chain is not physical or real goods bought and sold, so like widgets manufactured in a factory

and there's a supply chain behind that.

From a traders and portfolio managers perspective,

supplier deliveries is not as important as supplier deliveries

in the manufacturing sector and in the NMI itself,

nowhere near as important as business activity and new orders.

And employment is a lagging component which is likely to follow new orders and business activity.

So we don't completely obviously ignore employment and supplier deliveries.

They are contributing to the composite number as components in there.

But the composite number, because it's affected by employment and supplier deliveries,

we need to dig a little deeper and look at business activity and new orders.

And in terms of importance, put a much higher weighting on business activity

and new orders from a traders

and portfolio managers perspective.

Now there are, as I mentioned earlier, areas in the survey

that respondents provide information on

that are not included in the diffusion index. So inventories, prices,

backlog of orders, new export orders, imports, and inventory sentiment. In your own time,

you can self-educate on these areas. That's totally fine. You've got all the time in the world to go and do that on your own.

Backlog of orders in terms of level of importance is probably the area that you should be focusing

on. Why? Because backlog of orders gives us a general understanding of whether the service sector in the US is growing or declining.

If the service sector's backlog of orders is growing, for example, it's probably because

business activity and new orders are growing and the backlog is growing in response to that. So it's almost like a confirmation of our previous business activity

and new orders analysis from previous months. Additionally, if backlog of orders is rising

continuously, for example, it's likely that the service sector will require more resources to fulfill that business and a better supply chain or a more efficient supply chain.

Therefore, there will be investment in employment and the supply chain.

employment and supplier deliveries will respond to that as well.

So from a traders and portfolio managers perspective, in the diffusion index, business activity and new orders, by far the most important.

And in addition, responses from survey participants not included in the diffusion index backlog of orders as a confirmation indicator.

Now we have in the downloads area, you may or may not have noticed already in the downloads area beneath the video, see a few files there. One titled ISM Non-Manufacturing index and ISM Non-Manufacturing index S&P 500 GDP.

If you download these files, you'll see all of the historical data for the ISM Non-manufacturing index and also that data relative to S&P 500 returns and US GDP.

You'll also notice some charts that have been compiled from the data. What we're looking at

here is the NMI composite index and you can see the data only goes back till January 2008 and you can see very

clearly two areas of the chart where the index was significantly below 50 which was the global financial crisis of 2008, 2009,

and also the COVID economic shutdown in 2020.

You can also clearly see that for a period of a decade,

the US service sector at the composite level, the non-manufacturing PMI was above 50

from 2010 to 2020, denoting a full decade expansion in the US service sector.

You'll also notice in your spreadsheet downloads the comparison to quarter-on-quarter annualized GDP growth.

And we can see that in the data that goes back to 2008, that we get negative real GDP growth

quarter-on-quarter annualized in the 2008-2009 financial crisis and during the COVID economic lockdown. And during the expansionary period,

for the vast majority of that period, we get GDP growth quarter on quarter annualised, going in the same

direction positive as the non-manufacturing index. Only on a few occasions did we get one blip or

contraction when the ISM non-manufacturing index was positive for that entire decade. These were

not recessions. These were slowdowns in the US economy.

And there wasn't two quarters of negative GDP growth.

As the definition of a recession, they were just one quarter of contraction due to a slowdown in the US economy. And those slowdowns were temporary, not least because the Fed is looking at the same information that the market looks at and Fed policy responded

to the slowdown to avert a recession. But if you look at the chart, you can see in

the vast majority of times, non-manufacturing index and GDP growth

move in the same direction,

even though the data is only going back to 2008,

we can definitely denote

that they move in the same direction.

What we also get is our peak and trough levels. So, going back to the previous slide, if we see the total data composite non-manufacturing PMI,

very simply, we see around the 60 level.

This generally denotes a peak in the non-manufacturing

index and between around the level 40 and 45 from previous times when we've had

the NMI below 50 and we've had recessions in the US, between 40 and 45 is usually the trough level.

And if we just look at levels of GDP growth, GDP growth tends to correspond in the same direction

and peak in terms of percentage growth around the same times as non-manufacturing index in the US peaks.

So when the service sector peaks,

GDP growth quarter on quarter annualized

seems to peak as well,

and also trough at the same time,

but moving in the same direction, negative,

and also troughing at the same time.

And there's generally also a correlation there

between when the NMI slows down and comes off from its peak so does GDP growth also

Also in the downloads area, we get the annual percentage return data for the S&P 500.

And we compare this to the service sector PMI as well.

And we get a similar situation when we look at this versus when we look at GDP against the ISM services sector.

What we see is S&P 500 annual percentage returns,

not just the direction,

but the actual percentage returns themselves,

very closely linked to service sector performance.

If we look, for example, in the positive above 50 area for the decade between 2010 and 2020, if we look between the level of 55 and 60, this is generally associated with a

obviously positive stock market performance, but in terms of percentage

return, it's generally associated with between 15 and 20 20%. And certainly when we get the peaky level at the 60% level

for the NMI, that's where we see the positive performance,

the positive percentage performance of the S&P 500

peak around 20%.

That level generally is associated with the NMI being around 60%

and peaking an annual stock market performance

of the S&P 500 of about 20%.

If we look lower down in the positive area in the decade 2010 to 2020,

if the composite number is between 50 and 55, what does this really denote? It denotes that there's a slowdown in the US economy if we're coming from peak and it generally

is associated with positive stock market data in terms of year on year performance.

But the year on year performance is at a lower level, somewhere between flat and 10% positive

performance.

If we look below the 50 level and we look at our periods where the NMI was below 50, and

we look at the GDP year-on-year performances there.

You can see from the 2008-2009 period when we had the global financial crisis and the US recession, you can see that stock market performance year on year at were looking at around negative 8%, 9%, 10%, something like this in the annual performance of the stock market when the NMI went below 50% during the COVID economic shutdown.

Obviously, both of those periods and in the decade in between, the Fed was obviously very active, especially in those periods.

But we just denote this as traders and PMs of what we should be expecting if there's an economic shock like the global financial crisis, like the COVID economic lockdown, what level of stock market performance would we expect when the non-manufacturing index and

even the manufacturing index are below 50 and what that's associated with. So we're understanding business cycle history here and understanding what type

of S&P 500 returns, U.S. stock market returns are associated with U.S. PMIs in the manufacturing

and non-manufacturing sector during normal and abnormal conditions.

Now, I want to emphasize here that there is no rule book

which says if the ISM manufacturing or ISM non-manufacturing,

so services sector, prints at a certain level in a month,

services sector prints at a certain level in a month, it means we should expect a certain percentage

exactly stock market return. That's not how it works. What's happened in the past may not happen in the future. And also sometimes in the past, we see that general rules don't work all the time, of course not. So if we look for example here on this chart

at the end of 2013 and 2014 period, we can see that the NMI was printing a number of times below 55,

so between 50 and 55, and we still got stock market performance. That was around the 20%

level. But if you fast forward a little bit, you can see that when, for example, the NMI

starts to go down slightly, so has

peaked and goes down. So if we're looking at 2015, for example, and 2016, you can see stock market

performance does actually follow the NMI. So yes, as a guide, we can get direction. Of course,

that's the most important thing for traders and PMs.

We can get a good idea of stock market direction with a very, very high probability.

So expansion and contraction in the U.S. services sector, in the U.S. manufacturing sector, is a very good guide to GDP and stock market direction.

What we can't do, obviously, is pinpoint exact percentages.

So the most important thing is direction, long, short, or neutral bias in a portfolio.

Now, when we think of the data series itself, you'll have this in the downloads area in the spreadsheets.

When we think of that data series, we mentioned this earlier, the NMI composite data, it's only available since January 2008.

The components data, so the components of the survey,

it goes back to July, 1997.

And we can do a number of things with this data.

We can obviously look at the component data in isolation.

So we can look at that as a full history back to July, 1997.

And we can also obviously compare the component data

to the aggregate data of the composite PMI.

Obviously though, when we do that,

because the composite data only goes back to Jan 2008,

we can only make that comparison of the component data from Jan 2008 to present day.

So if we have a look at, for example,

the Business Activity Index,

we can go all the way back to the late '90s.

Here we've taken the data from '98 onwards,

and we get a bit more of a business cycle history from the service sector. So you can see, for example, in the

early 2000s, if you recall, during the tech wreck where the financial markets collapsed in the dot-com bust. You can see in 2000 that the

ISM services sector business activity index was peaking and had a few per

aggressive blips down and that's when GDP began to collapse and the stock market began to collapse as well.

And you can see it goes below 50 in 2001, recovers in 2002, and then we start an expansionary period in 2003.

we start an expansionary period in 2003. But what's interesting is that if you think of the service sector during the expansionary period of 2003 to 2007-8, you can see that it peaked

in 2003 to 2005 and then started a slow decline, but really in a trend declined during that entire period.

And then as we know, the composite index went below 50 in the great financial crisis before

the financial crisis actually happened. And business activity nosedived as well

at the end 2007, beginning 2008,

and took quite a while to recover

after it nosedived again later in 2008

after spending some time back above 50.

So it's good to look at the component data in the NMI

because it does go back a little bit further. Obviously, when we compare it to

the ISM Non-Manufacturing Composite Index, if we take for example Business Activity,

we can only go back to Jan 2008 to make that comparison and you can

see business activity moves in lockstep with the composite. Why? Because it's

contributing to the composite and it's probably along with new orders the most

important component out of the four.

Now what you can also do in your spreadsheets is look at business activity versus the NMI

next to each other in terms of the data itself, not just on a chart.

You can make comparisons and look at periods of stock market history to understand what was

really going on. You can also do this for the ISM manufacturing. So you can do this

for new orders as well. One of the components of the ISM manufacturing

composite index and you can look at that versus the ISM manufacturing index itself. And what we can do is look at periods in time in stock market history and have a look at what was going on then for

both business activity and ISM new orders. So what we're looking at here, for example,

if we start on the left-hand side, we're looking at NMI business activity versus the NMI composite

for the period August 2018 to December 2020. And if you recall, when we were looking at manufacturing, ISM manufacturing

data, August 18 was the peak period. And you can see when we look at the NMI business activity,

which is in the first column, you can see it didn't peak at August 18th.

It peaked at September 18th.

On the right-hand side, you can see the NMI itself.

So we've got business activity in the first column,

and we've got the NMI in the second column.

And in August 18th, we have a reading of 58.8 and September 18, a peak of 60.8.

And then if we look at both business activity and NMI from August 18 to August 19, which is the

period we looked at previously when we looked at manufacturing data, you can see a general

decline in both. But what's interesting is that business activity in August 19 was 61.5. And the NMI composite

was in the mid-50s. So in August 19, it was 56. So if we think about this, and we think back to the ISM manufacturing data, business activity and the composite is generally trending lower.

And the business activity number had peaked in September 18.

number had peaked in September 18. But when we think about this in terms of the ISM, we can look at it on the right-hand side and we can see that the ISM new

orders number was 47.2 and the ISM composite was 48.8. So what can we

deduce from this? We can deduce that in the slowdown in 2018, it was a manufacturing slowdown.

It was led by the manufacturing sector, not the service sector. The service sector was still in

pretty good shape. And if you recall, that was the period when the Fed was cutting breaks in the summer of 2019.

So we have the July cut, the September and the October cut.

So what was the Fed responding to at that time?

Well, we know from the money markets, our leading indicators from the money markets,

from both government bond and corporate bond markets, there was stress there.

But also, the Fed was responding to a manufacturing slowdown in the US.

If we fast forward a little bit, and we go a little bit further in history and we go to the March, April, May, June 2020 period, if we look at business activity and the composite NMI, we obviously saw a big move down because of COVID and the economic lockdown.

But what's interesting is that business activity went below 50 for the first time in March 2020.

And remember, these are reported in the following month. So that number will have been reported in the first week of April.

And the NMI itself wasn't below 50.

So it was a 53.6 reported in April for March 2020.

So what's interesting there is that business activity

is leading the NMI lower.

And if we go a little bit further

and we look at the April, May, June period,

we see a trough in business activity at 26. And we see a massive rebound for the May number.

So a massive down move and a massive rebound. If we look at the ISM new orders versus ISM manufacturing on the right,

if we look at the April, May and June period, yes, we get new orders going below 50 in February

2020. But when we get the move back up after the trough, the May 2020 move higher is nowhere near as big as the magnitude as the move in business activity for the NMI.

number. You can see the recovery post the Fed rate cuts where the composite index went back above 50 in January and February 2020 putting in two readings above 50. And then the new orders

index you can see that it only puts one reading in above 50 at 52. That was in

Jan 2020. And then it went below new orders went below 50 again in February 2020. And then obviously had

a big move down in March 2020.

But when we compare this,

you can see that going into the COVID collapse

and the COVID economic lockdown,

that new orders was the first to go.

New orders in the ISM was the first to go in Feb 2020.

So we got a warning there.

We got a very strong warning of a manufacturing slowdown.

And as mentioned, the service sector, there wasn't really a big slowdown happening,

not occurring like in the manufacturing sector, even during the period when the Fed

was cutting rates. It was still reported in the mid

50s, but then it went below 50 for the March period. Business activity went below 50 for the

March period. If you look at the composite NMI, it didn't even go below 50 until the April reading.

What's interesting coming out of the sell-off or the slowdown,

we know that the bottom in the S&P 500 was in March.

But what's interesting is when we look at business activity and after the big move down from 48 to 26 for March and April

readings, what's interesting is the big move up in May to 41 and the big move up in June to 66.

Because when we compare this to new orders and ISM Manufacturing Composite, so the ISM new orders and ISM manufacturing composite.

So the ISM new orders and the ISM manufacturing composite,

when we compare business activity and the big move down

and then the coming out of it, the two big moves up.

What's apparent is that the service sector rebounded much quicker

than the manufacturing sector.

So looking at these historical moments,

it's just good to understand what was going on there.

The NMI, business activity--

so business activity in the service sector

is sometimes a leading indicator to the NMI

itself and even to the ISM, but not all the time.

So you have to use these surveys and the rest of the leading indicators, so our money market

indicators, you have to use them all in conjunction. And also the macroeconomic leading indicators that are coming

up in the PTM video series. You have to use all of these in conjunction to understand stock market

history. And when you're sitting there at any one moment in time,

time. You don't know exactly what's going to happen. You need to have all of the

information to make an informed decision. If we look at our other important

component of the NMI, that's new orders. So we can compare that visually on a chart. We

can look at new orders versus the ISM non-manufacturing index. And you can see there's a very, very strong

relationship between the two. If we look at our table again over that period, we can look at May 2020. So we're looking at that period again, August 18 to December 2020. And we're looking at NMI business activity

on the left and the composite NMI on the right. And we're looking on the right-hand side of the

screen here at a screenshot of the May 2020 non-manufacturing survey release. And what we're doing is we are comparing it to

ISM manufacturing as well. So we're comparing it to the readings there of the

composite level and of components. So what we've highlighted here is the May 2020 survey for both the composite NMI and business activity or production, as it's called in the survey.

So we have the NMI composite and business activity.

May 2020, the big rebound.

So you can see the series in April for business activity was 26. And in May 2020, it was 41. So this is the big rebound number. And we know from hindsight, looking at history, that there was a move also from May to June of 41 to 66.

But we're looking at the May 2020 situation here.

So imagine you are sitting at this moment in time and you see the May release, okay?

So this is released in the first week of June

and you see the May release, okay, for non-manufacturing

and you see a massive rebound from 26 to 41 in business activity for the NMI.

And at the time, imagine yourself comparing it to the ISM manufacturing data, which was released just before it.

So if you look at the manufacturing data, we look at production

for manufacturing, the move is from 27.5 to 33.2. So a change of 5.7 points versus services, a change of 15.

points. So you'd be sitting here at this moment in time, looking at this survey and realizing that

both the ISM and services have probably troughed, but services have rebounded really, really hard.

And you can see as well from the language being used to denote the speed

of the contraction reported from the NMI composite

and business activity,

that the direction is still contracting,

but at a slower pace.

How would you read into this?

Well, trough conditions.

Trough conditions have occurred, most likely,

and there's been a very hard rebound in the service sector.

Even though it's still contracting, it's contracting slower.

So we're not out of the woods yet,

but you certainly would not have a short bias in your portfolio.

You would be long to neutral in the portfolio.

Now, with a bit of hindsight, we can understand what was going on

in the stock markets at that time. If you recall, the COVID lows were in March and then

the market rallied pretty aggressively. And we've highlighted two areas here. We've highlighted the rebound in the markets off the lows.

So the rebound in the S&P 500 off the lows up until the end of May, beginning of June.

And then from June to the end of October.

Why have we done that? Well, because we want to look at what the stock market did after we realized,

or when we got the information from the ISM manufacturing and ISM non-manufacturing,

that there was likely trough conditions. So what's interesting here is that even if during the March, April and May period,

you were not participating or trying to pick the bottom,

you still had plenty of time to get in

to a long portfolio bias after that period.

And what we mean by not participating doesn't necessarily mean you

don't have any position at all. What it means is that your portfolio is neutral and you're

not taking a directional bet in your portfolio either way. The point here is that you

didn't even have to have a dogmatic view either way during the

March, April, May period. Then the ISM manufacturing and ISM non-manufacturing indexes came out

with new orders and business activity components.

showing a trough condition in the first week of June.

And the business activity NMI number was a big move higher.

So the point here is that you could have just not been dogmatic during that period with a directional bias either way.

So the period March, April, May.

with a directional bias either way, so the period March, April, May.

And then when you get the leading indicator signal

from the surveys, that's when you know

that there's trough conditions

or very likely to be trough conditions.

You can't be 100% certain,

but you can be pretty certain

that trough conditions have appeared.

And if you think about the range here

in the green box of the S&P 500 from first week of June to October, you're looking at about a range

of 500 points on a starting point of 3,000. So you're looking at about 15, 16% here

So you're looking at about 15%, 16% here at the index level in a period of three months where it goes from 3,000 to 3,500 from the first week of June till the first week of September.

That's obviously a pretty wild move in the short space of time for an index.

pretty wild move in the short space of time for an index. So again, the point here is that you really don't have to be

very dogmatic in your portfolio at economic turning points

or during liquidity events.

You can sit back, maintain a non-bias in your portfolio

back, maintain a non-bias in your portfolio and wait for the leading indicator macroeconomic signals, generally speaking, you will get returns by waiting for the leading indicator

signals.

So what's good about being a student of macroeconomics and leading indicators in order to make decisions in your portfolio?

You don't have to be a hero.

So we don't want to be in a situation all the time where we're trying to pick the bottom in the stock market.

We're trying to pick the top in the stock market.

We just lean towards a

slight bias or bias when we get confirmation in the leading indicators. Because the leading

indicators lead GDP and lead stock market direction and returns. The clue is in the name.

They are leading. So when we see peak conditions and trough conditions,

yes, we get a clue as to the direction we should be leaning towards,

and that's the direction we lean to.

But we don't have to try to pick bottoms

and sell tops. This is about on balance rotation and having the right positions at the right time,

which we're going to come on to later in the video series.

Having the right positions at the right time and leaning towards a directional bias when the leading

indicators are telling us to do so. We don't have to fight it and be a hero.

So if we think about this moment in time, I think the NMI and business activity as a component

in May 2020 is good to look at. Let's just sum it up here. It's a good example. So March and April were the months of the liquidity sell-off and Fed injections of liquidity into the financial markets. So for the bond market and for S&P 500 during that COVID-19 economic shutdown.

during that COVID-19 economic shutdown.

Meanwhile, at the same time, the ISM Manufacturing Index

and the ISM Non-Manufacturing Surveys

were actually troughing.

We got given that signal.

Now you have to understand that at that moment in time,

we obviously do not know if it is a trough or not.

So this is in April 2020,

when the NMI business activity was at 26,

and the composite was at 41.6.

We don't know at that time.

You know, at that moment in time,

so for the April survey, first week of May, that's the time of the release.

We don't know at that moment in time that it's a trough.

We only know that it's a potential trough if in the following month, there's a higher reading for the composite and the component data.

And that report was for May, which is the one we've been looking at,

and that came out in the first week of June.

And this obviously, you know, same methodology applies to peaks as well.

So when we're looking at peaks, when we have a very high level, around 60 or above 60

in the NMI, we don't necessarily think to ourselves immediately, because it's around 60,

it must be a peak. It could put in a higher reading in the next month.

What we have to think about is if there's a move lower when we come from peak, if that's

going to be a continual factor.

So the previous month was actually a genuine peak at troughs and peaks.

the next move, the next month doesn't confirm that the previous month is definitely a trough or a peak.

What it does do is tell us that there's a very high potential that it could be a peak,

and we adjust our bias accordingly.

of bias accordingly. In the May 2020 example, back during that time in the first week of June, we had a pretty

good indication that the Fed actions and COVID-19 itself had a big positive impact on NMI business

activity.

So, if you think about it in the context

of the historical example,

and what was going on elsewhere in the economy at the time,

we had the Fed actions that were huge amounts

of unprecedented liquidity,

both in conventional and non-conventional means.

But in the COVID-19 economic lockdown itself, that was an example in history where the service

sector rebounded hard because a lot of services were demanded during that time because people literally could not go to work.

So a lot of services were doing very well. Other services weren't doing so well, but there

was a big boom in, for example, stay at home services, and that had a big impact. So when we think of the context of what was

occurring at the time, we had a very good indication that the dynamics that were playing out,

and then we see the rebound in the services sector in the first week of June, we had a very

strong indication that the economy had probably troughed.

And of course, we weren't just looking at the NMI.

We were also looking at the ISM.

And we would have been, at that moment in time,

also looking at the yield curve.

And we would have had context as to where the yield curve had come from and where

it was at that time.

So if we look at some history here of the yield curve and we look at where the yield

curve was on the 1st of March 2020, you can see very obvious inversion there. And where were we on the 7th of June 2020,

so the end of the first week of 2020? Well, we look at the Fed Funds rate,

it's dropped from 158 to 0.07.

and you can see by the first week of June,

there was a normal upwardly sloping yield curve.

So imagine we were sitting in that moment in time.

This would be part of our decision-making process as well.

We'd be looking at the yield curve as a leading indicator.

And what's actually interesting

is that the tens minus twos, which indicates a very high percentage probability of recession, the tens minus twos never actually inverted during that period. that we looked at in previous videos, when we looked at August 2019,

where there was slight, very short term inversion,

but it never really inverted

for a meaningful period of time.

You can see on the chart how small that was.

It was basically just flat.

If we look at that period and compare it to say February, March, April 2020,

you can see that the tens minus twos never actually inverted during that period. So the indication

from the bond market in the tens minus twos was that recession wasn't going to happen. Now, we know from hindsight

that recession did occur, but at the time, we wouldn't have known that. So in hindsight,

we can look at the data, and you can see this in the spreadsheet downloads, that we had two quarters of negative real GDP growth in Q1 and Q2 2020.

And you can see where the 10s and 2s were in 2020 at their 2020 low.

So the spread in terms of its low, the 10s minus 2 spread.

We can see that towards the end of February 2020, and that was not indicating recession.

That was because of massive Fed liquidity injections through conventional and non-conventional

means.

And we can see that the market was expecting that. through conventional and non-conventional means.

And we can see that the market was expecting that. The market was actually expecting,

when we look at the 10s minus two spread,

that there would be Fed intervention.

And you can see for the rest of 2020,

this is the spread going higher

and representing a normalization of the yield curve.

So it's always good guys to look at how the leading indicators were behaving. The

certain periods of time in macroeconomic history because it gives us a better

education for when we use them in the future and we're placing ourselves at any

random moment in time and we're looking at all of these indicators. We can

understand and appreciate what happened in the past, what is happening now,

and what is likely to happen in the future.

Now, another feature of the non-manufacturing index,

the services PMI,

is that we have, like the manufacturing index survey,

we have a qualitative assessment

inside the non-manufacturing index. And again,

we are looking here now at the example from May 2020. And you can see when we look at the industries,

We can look at the industry performance for growth and contraction.

So we have our 18 industries.

And in May 2020, we're using this example,

four of the services industries were reporting growth in May. And that was agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting as an industry,

finance and insurance, public administration, go figure,

government and public administration services and companies servicing government were obviously doing well at that time.

And information.

There were 14 industries that were reporting a decrease in business activity or industry

performance at that time.

And that was mining, arts, entertainment and recreation and other services, construction,

educational services, professional, scientific and technical services, utilities, wholesale

trade, accommodation and food services, management of companies and support services, real estate, go figure, rental and leasing,

transportation and warehousing, healthcare and social assistance, and retail trade.

Now, what we've done is here to look at a few examples of what you might have been thinking

at the time is that we've highlighted two areas. So we've highlighted agriculture, forestry,

fishing and hunting, which was reporting growth in May during that period. So May versus April. And it was

one of the only four industries reporting growth. And we're looking at one of the sectors

that was really hit hard by the COVID-19 economic lockdown and recession during that period.

We're looking at accommodation and food services. So imagine yourself going through this report at that moment in time and at any moment in time when you're downloading the report, looking at the data, but you're also looking at the qualitative assessment too.

Imagine yourself in this situation and you were seeing this stuff.

So let's have a look at a statement in the qualitative statements that are coming out

from these sectors.

Let's have a look at accommodation and food services first.

Let's read this out.

Current operations have been reduced to accommodate a slowed economy, but the business is taking

time to review operations and implement more efficient processes.

Purchasing has slowed for client-facing goods and services, but has increased for internal

operating supplies and services.

What are we getting from agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting?

Demand seems to have bottomed out, and we're seeing signs of increasing interest.

Inventories of finished goods are extensive, so production will slowly rebound in the coming months.

So what is happening here?

Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting are literally communicating to us qualitatively in words that conditions have bottomed and

they're bullish inventories are high and they're expecting a rebound and for the

rebound to continue what our accommodation and food service is

telling us well they're telling us that business has been reduced to

accommodate the current economic environment and they're

taking time to review the situation. Well, they're obviously reporting slowdown, a

decrease May versus April and they're communicating to us no visibility. So two

very very different qualitative responses here.

Elsewhere in this qualitative list of statements here coming from the different industries,

you might pick up on some interesting stuff as well

in other areas.

So for example, in this list of qualitative statements,

online education for educational services is a very strong indication

of a rebound or strength in that industry.

Additionally, if you look at near the bottom, you can see retail trade, so retail trade,

had obviously a big impact there.

You know, one company here is responding,

saying that they successfully kept 90%

of their retail locations open to the public.

And the 300+ headquarters has been set up

for staff to work remotely to support the retail locations.

And there's obviously conflicting statements as well

from public administration services.

So if you look at the statement there, they're saying COVID-19 is still impacting our revenue significantly.

And the prices we are paying for goods and services.

Obviously, that conflicts with the previous slide where they were reporting growth.

If you look at finance and insurance, they're saying extremely busy with Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program.

So these were the Paycheck Protection subsidies that were going out, paid for by the US government

at the time. And yes, this is in line with the growth reported on the previous slide.

So that's finance and insurance companies servicing that public service.

So you can see that when you read through all these things, you can get a lot of clues as to what's going on in the economy at the time.

So May 2020 is a good example of this.

So May 2020 is a good example of this. We're gonna concentrate on agriculture, forestry,

fishing and hunting,

and accommodation and food services here.

And remember, just try and put yourself into the shoes

of somebody that was looking at this at the time,

or think of yourself when you're looking at a new survey that's come out cold and you're

looking at it at any one moment in time in the future. At this stage, all we have is some

qualitative statements and some data to show growth and contraction in certain areas, so

certain industries. You would obviously do research on these qualitative

statements and do further work to potentially generate some trade ideas. So,

for example, in May 2020, we got that strong message from the agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting industry.

If we went away and did some work on that industry, on that sector, we may have come across

a stock called Yeti.

What does Yeti do?

Well, Yeti provides products for the outdoor

and recreation markets.

So, we're talking stuff like coolers, seat cushions,

beverage holders, security cable locks and brackets,

stuff like this, okay? Bottles, T-shirts, caps, gear cases, you name it, Yeti does it.

And just look at the performance of this stock relative to the S&P 500.

If we look at a point of origin in the first week of June,

we look at a point of origin in the first week of June, when the non-manufacturing index data and these qualitative statements were released. We're looking at an index of 100,

and we're looking at the first week of June till the end of the year 2020.

of June till the end of the year 2020.

Okay.

We're starting at the point of origin in the first week of June at 100, and we're comparing Yeti to the S&P 500.

So over that six-month period, how did Yeti, our outdoor and recreation stock, compare to

the S&P 500.

Well, Yeti in absolute terms was up 112% over that six month period.

And the S&P 500 from first week of June till the end of the year, during that period, the S&P 500 was up 23%.

So we're looking at here, guys, roughly a 90% outperformance in a six to seven month period.

the first week of June when we compare Yeti as an outdoor recreation stock compared to the stock market S&P 500, which obviously is a pretty phenomenal performance, outperformance

that is.

outperformance, that is. Now, Yeti itself as a stock is actually not part of the S&P 500 index.

So yes, we can compare Yeti to the broader market of mega cap and large cap stocks. But

if we compare Yeti to the IWM, the Russell 2000 ETF during that time, this would be more accurate because Yeti is in the IWM.

Yeti is part of the Russell 2000, or it was back then anyway.

This will be slightly more of an accurate exercise to compare the performance to the IWM.

The IWM was up 40% during that same period, and we know Yeti was up 112%.

So we're looking at about a 70% outperformance here.

So as an example, in May 2020, listening to the very strong statements coming from the outdoor and recreations industry,

listening to that very strong message, doing further work,

and finding the stock or stocks that were going to rebound,

definitely made returns for you.

This happens time and time again in both manufacturing

and non-manufacturing reports.

We get fantastic qualitative data, especially at turning points. What we can also

look at here is a stock called QSR, which is a restaurant brands international. We look at the

same period in time. This company owns franchises like Burger King, Popeyes, and also the coffee shops,

Tim Hortons, mostly in Canada.

We can compare QSR to the S&P 500 there.

So we're looking at accommodation and food services.

Obviously, these guys were reporting a difficult time in May 2020,

not giving any visibility. So this industry

was giving no visibility in the qualitative statements in the NMI. And you can see the

stock performance versus the S&P 500. The stock was up during that period around 9%

and the S&P 500 was up 23%.

So you're looking at basically a 14% underperformance

of QSR versus the S&P 500 during that time.

So again, if you went through the qualitative statements

at that time, you were hunting around

for potential short ideas,

you will have done further work, obviously,

than just looking at the qualitative statements

and just randomly picking a stock.

You will have done further work

and all the processes

that we're going to give you in the PTM video series.

And you may have bumped into a nice situation here,

like QSR, where yes, the stock,

didn't go down.

We obviously want, ideally, situations

where stocks go down for our shorts.

But a nice situation like QSR

where you get underperformance

relative to the market

and relative to your longs

is still acceptable.

And if you look at, for example, the performance of QSR, where there were many times during

that period, up until the end of October, beginning of November, where the stock was

actually down.

So you could have actually made money on the short as well, not just as an underperformer

in the portfolio relative to your longs.

So in terms of using the NMI for trade idea generation, we use it in exactly the same way when we assessed the ISM Manufacturing Index.

We're taking quantitative data and qualitative statements to enable light bulb indications

or clues as to where to look in the stock market to get potential trade ideas. You have to go through a

monthly quantitative and qualitative process of organizing the numbers and

statements and look for turning points or trends in the data, not only at an

aggregate level but also at the sector level. And do not obviously just go through

ISM manufacturing or NMI data and quantitative statements and then just randomly pick stocks.

That's just stupid. You have to go through all of the other processes that we're going to give you in the PTM video

series to identify potential stocks that are going to move from the indicated trends in

the ISM and the NMI.

Unfortunately, there just aren't shortcuts here, guys. The only way you can save some time

is perhaps having a third party organize all the data for you.

But you're going to have to generate the trade ideas.

You're going to have to go through the data,

understand the data, understand the qualitative statements,

interpret them correctly,

get the light bulb indication

and clues of where to look in the stock market. And then you're actually going to have to look

at industries or sectors in the stock market and find

the stocks that are going to be benefiting from current conditions and

stocks that are going to be struggling from current conditions. There's no

shortcuts. You have to do the work yourself. You have to generate your own

ideas. Additionally, do not rely on the ISM and the NMI as the only places you

look for potential trade ideas. Again,

we mentioned this in the previous video, there are multiple places to get trade ideas in the

financial markets and in the world in general. Now, additional to qualitative statements coming from each of those 18 industries, we also get our

quantitative data. And you'll have this in the downloads area, similar to ISM manufacturing

sectors. In the NMI, we can look at service sector or the service sector industries,

and we can rank them and color code them for heatmap.

So again, we've got in this analysis available in the downloads,

you can update this every month yourself.

Just learn how to use the spreadsheet properly.

learn how to use the spreadsheet properly. We've got the six months from July to December 2020.

And we're ranking and sorting in descending order in terms of growth in December 2020.

And just as an example here, if we look at our two sectors that we were just looking at, we were looking at agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting.

If you look at the second half of 2020, from July to December, you can see that we've got

growth indicated in every month.

So month on month growth in every month. So month on month growth in every month.

And you can see the rankings go from three to five to 12,

and then four and seven.

So essentially the growth is getting on a relative basis

stronger relative to other industry

sectors, then going steady towards the end of the year.

And then you can see it, for example,

in accommodation and food services, second from bottom.

We're going from growth, moderate growth in July,

some quick rebound at the beginning of,

in the middle of summer in August.

And then growth as we get towards the holiday season,

in terms of rankings, starts to go down slightly.

And then we get contraction

in December. So if you recall, in May 2020 report, which was reported first week of June,

for accommodation and food services, they reported contraction.

When we look at what happened for the rest of 2020, we got some growth in the sector,

and then we saw contraction at the end of the year.

So again, you can look at this at the aggregate level,

but you can also look at this at the component level

for each sector as well, as we did with ISM manufacturing.

So download the spreadsheets, figure out how the

spreadsheets work, and you can update this every month when the NMI survey comes

out and look for trends and turning points in the data.

What you can also do is obviously take those qualitative statements and stick them in the NMI spreadsheet. Again,

that's a very useful exercise to go through every month if you're taking the qualitative

statements and sticking them in the industry comments sheet because you're much more likely to internalize

what is being said.

So, in terms of further work on the ISM,

Non-Manufacturing Reports on Business,

we've looked at the main areas for the diffusion index,

business activity and new orders. In your own time, go away and look at the areas that are not included in the Diffusion Index.

Do a bit of work around those and concentrate mainly on backlog of orders.

You've, again, guys, got to have a self-starter mentality here.

Learn the intricacies of the composite index components

and the data sets that aren't included in the composite index.

We're not indulging in smooth feeding and copy trading here at ITPM.

We expect that you want to be good at this, therefore you're

going to be doing your own work, generating your own trade ideas and

making your own returns. What we're doing here is starting you off very

strongly in the right direction. So let summarise all of this for the ISM Non-Manufacturing Report on Business.

It's one of the most important leading indicators out there for professional traders and portfolio managers.

Why? Well, we know US GDP drives global GDP.

and stock market returns in the US,

and to a large extent, the rest of the world.

We're using it as a leading indicator

in conjunction with the ISM Manufacturing Index

and the components of that

to predict US GDP,

stock market direction,

and potential stock market returns in the US, and potentially

global GDP and stock market returns outside the US in the rest of the world.

They are both as important, remember, as each other.

Yes, the manufacturing index is 20% of the US economy.

The services sector is 80% of the US economy.

But from a trader and portfolio manager perspective, we treat them with equal importance. Now, we don't only use the NMI in conjunction

with the ISM Manufacturing Survey.

We also use it in conjunction at any one moment in time

with the money market indicators

that we've covered so far in the video series

and other leading indicators that we're

going to cover in future parts of the PTM video series to predict turning points in the business

cycle and trends in the business cycle and therefore our portfolio direction. So again, it's useful for getting a bias,

a net long or short bias,

or even a neutral bias in the portfolio.

Similar to the ISM Manufacturing Index,

with the NMI also,

we can look for clues at a sectoral level

as to how companies will report their earnings

in upcoming quarters.

Therefore, the NMI can also potentially help us

to generate trade ideas in single stocks

for our long short portfolio.

So not just the bias for the portfolio, but also

what we should be looking at to be long and short in the portfolio to obtain that bias.

So it's a great leading indicator. The NMI, it's a great leading indicator that's going to enable us to be right somewhere between 60 and 80%

in our estimation of the US economy to get a directional bias in the portfolio of long,

short, or neutral. But it's also useful for us.

at a sectoral level for single stock trade ideas.

And we can use it in conjunction

with the money market leading indicators

that we covered in videos four to six

and the other macroeconomic surveys or indicators

that we're going to be looking at

in the rest of the PTM video series

to get a solid understanding of the US economy,

money flows and potential Fed policy.

When we use it in conjunction with the ISM manufacturing POI and other tools that we're

going to be covering, we add another powerful weapon to our macroeconomic survey armory.

So, closing the loop, this is what we're going to do.

We add the ISM, Non-Manufacturing Report on Business, the Services PMI,

to our leading indicator list of surveys,

and our bigger list of leading indicators overall.

So, we have our money market indicators, real interest rates and the yield curve in the government

bond market. We have investment grade, high yield and junk spreads over the 10-year, that's in the corporate bond market.

We have our accessory, the M2 money supply growth,

and we have our stock market volatility

from the IPLT video series.

In our surveys list, we are now adding the ISM,

Non-Manufacturing Report on Business,

to the survey list, and that is joining the

ISM Manufacturing Report on Business.

So what we've done in the last two videos is we've covered the main PMIs in the United

States, the Manufacturing PMI and the Services PMI.

That's it, we have covered purchasing manager indices,

the main ones in the United States.

We're going to leave now PMIs

and we're going to now look at other surveys,

other leading indicators in the United States

that are very important.

Next, we're going to be looking at the US consumer.

So instead of going back to the desk, let's get straight into it.

Let's start looking at the US consumer.

I'll see you in the next video.