Okay, so welcome back to the screen. We're going to get stuck in now to video number 12,

our next leading indicator. Leading indicator number eight, cyclical commodity prices.

And let's have a look at what we've covered so far. We've covered a lot of leading indicators now.

You can see we're accumulating throughout the video series.

The first part of the PTM accumulating multiple leading indicators.

We've covered the money markets and we've covered surveys.

And now we're going to be adding in cyclical commodity prices. And we're going to

be covering oil, copper, lumber, and iron ore. And we're also going to be covering currencies.

So we're going to be looking specifically at the US dollar trade-weighted indices. But before we get into that, we need to do a

bit of background work and a bit of information on inflation. Why? Because if

we're going to understand cyclical commodity prices and US dollar trade

weighted indices, it's important to understand what inflation is, how inflation works,

and really how it fits into our overall framework. Now, having a low and stable rate

of inflation in an economy is an essential part of a healthy capitalist system.

What we need is a stable and predictable rate

of price inflation of goods and services.

And what this does is it provides a foundation

that enables a stable rate of real GDP growth and employment.

So the ideal situation, let's cover that first.

What we want in a healthy economy

is a good level of nominal GDP growth

and a stable positive rate of inflation

that's lower than the rate of nominal GDP growth.

And that gives us positive real GDP

and a predictable rate of GDP.

So this is considered to be an ideal situation in the economy.

Really, it's what the Fed is looking for with obviously with their dual mandate, strong levels of employment.

But, you know, we can also have other situations occurring at any

one moment in time. We can have the non-ideal situation, which is bad, okay?

We can also have high levels of positive price changes. So we're getting inflation or

negative price changes, where we're getting price deflation, and we can have inflation volatility.

Conditions like this are considered to be not ideal or even bad. And what we can do is we can

analyze historical inflation data, and we can observe what are considered to be normal, so ideal, inflationary conditions, and abnormal, so non-ideal, inflationary, or even deflationary conditions.

And we can look at the data set and we can see big positive and negative changes in price inflation, so moves away from normal conditions. And what we find is,

is that these abnormal conditions are in the significant minority. Now, how is inflation

measured and presented? Well, we're going to be looking at a few measures here, just for some

background information, so you understand this better.

We're going to be looking at CPI, the Consumer Price Index, and the PPI, which is the Producer

Price Index. So let's start with CPI. The CPI stats are split into two different measures.

One is including food and energy, and one is excluding

food and energy. And the data is released monthly from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. And the link

is on the screen there where you can get the monthly news release. Now, the data for CPI can be downloaded at the second link on the screen,

and it goes back as far as 1947.

And it's constructed by taking the weighted averages of prices

on a wide variety of items, which are basically assigned weights,

representing their importance within certain groups.

And the prices are collected on a monthly basis from 4,000 housing units and around 26,000

retail establishments across cities, across 87 urban areas of the United States.

Now, this is obviously a large data set,

so it's a significant number.

And of course, there's a lot of importance placed on inflation

by the Federal Reserve in its dual mandate

to maintain a certain level of inflation

and a target employment. Now, this data set, obviously, it's a

big one. And this is because this is for the CPI all items measure. So 4,000 housing units and 26,000

retail establishments across the 87 urban areas of the US. But it's very important to remember,

guys, that CPI and inflation data in the US is a coincident indicator. It's telling us what is

happening in the economy now rather than in the future. So it's not as useful as leading indicators because the CPI follows our leading indicators.

By definition, inflation data is telling us what happened to prices in the previous month.

However, it is useful to us. We do need to know, obviously, the level of inflation in the economy.

obviously, the level of inflation in the economy, it's still useful as a confirmation indicator because the Fed can be obviously reactionary and therefore interest rate policy based on

inflation expectations can obviously be affected. But always remember that it's a coincident indicator. So we use it as traders and portfolio managers

as a confirmation indicator to essentially confirm what we were seeing in the leading indicators

in previous months. So this is the all items number. So this is including food and energy.

So links on the screen there. Data is very easy to get.

You just hit the download button at the St. Louis Fed link and the data drops into a spreadsheet.

Next up, the CPIX food and energy. There's another link there for St. Louis Fed.

There's another link there for St. Louis Fed. You can download the data there.

And the data goes back as far as 1957.

It's calculated in the same way as the all items number.

However, the goods included do not include any food items and items that are linked to

the price of energy, including oil.

Now, the CPI X food and energy number is sometimes referred to in the market as the core CPI number

because it measures core inflation in the U.S. without having the exposure to international food and energy prices that can

essentially be volatile and subject to exogenous influences in the global marketplace that are

outside of the control of the central authorities in the US. Now, again, CPI ex-food and energy, it's taken from the same data set, reported monthly and backwards looking.

So it's again a coincident indicator.

So we can use it again as a confirmation indicator because the Fed, of course, is not

always predicting what's going to happen and trying to prevent what's going to happen.

The Fed can also be reactionary.

And it's just knowledge that we must have.

We need to know at any one moment in time, as traders and PMs, what is actually happening

with inflation in the economy.

So that's how inflation is measured in the U.S. for consumers.

All items, including food and energy, and X food and energy.

So the CPI, all items, and the CPI, X food and energy.

What about businesses?

Well, we have a measure for inflation for businesses as well.

This is called the producer price Index, so the PPI.

And the data for PPI, all commodities, can be downloaded again following that link at the St. Louis Fed.

The data goes back as far as 1913 and it's indexed to 100 in 1982.

and it's indexed to 100 in 1982.

And the data is different from the consumer data, the CPI,

because it measures input costs or prices for businesses that make products and provide services,

whereas the CPI only measures prices that are facing consumers.

Now, the way the BLS puts the all commodities index together,

basically price change data is indexed for the commodities,

indexed and analyzed for a whole bunch of commodities

and import prices across a whole bunch of industries.

And this makes up the overall All Commodities Index and the list of those industries.

And there's an index for each one.

So the list of the industries and those indices can be found at the St. Louis Fed link on the screen.

And all of these commodities that are indexed basically make up the All Commodities Index.

Now, the PPI, All Commodities Index, is again a coincidence indicator, but it is, of course, useful to us still as traders and PMs

as a confirmation indicator, because again, the Fed can be reactionary instead of possibly

being preventative. Now, our three inflation measures, so our monthly CPI All Items, our monthly CPI X Food and Energy,

and our PPI All Commodities Index, so released on a monthly basis as well. These are our three

inflation measures, we can obviously get the data from the St. Louis Fed website and we can do a

statistical analysis of it. And what we do is we do a distribution of returns analysis on the

inflation data itself. And the reason we do this is because what we want to understand is what is happening with inflation at any one moment in time

in the economy. So what we have to do is look to the historical data and understand inflation

and what it actually means when it moves. So as a student of the financial markets,

as a student of macroeconomics, what you need to do is have a look at the data sets and understand the moves in inflation and what it actually means.

So basically in the future, you'll understand the context of any inflation data when it comes out and be able to understand it better because you'll have it in a

historical context. Now, the way in which we analyze the inflation stats is very similar to the way in

which we analyzed the M2 money supply data earlier in the PTM video series and the various tradable instruments in the IPLT video

series. We basically use the same method. So we calculate a distribution of returns to discover

what is a normal level of inflation and what is an abnormal level of inflation in order to assess future

monthly moves. So we understand the historical context of any move that we analyze in the future.

So we take the monthly index levels that are reported by the BLS throughout history, and we work out percentage changes on a

month-by-month basis. And then we run a statistical distribution analysis. So in the future, when we

analyze any inflation data releases, we can distinguish between what is considered to be a normal move and what

is considered to be an abnormal move for inflation.

Now, you know how to do this method.

You know how to use the method to analyze data.

So if you have a self-starter mentality, which I hope you do, in your own time, you can use the same approach that we

utilized with the M2 money supply in the PTM video series and those tradable instruments

in the IPLT video series and determine both normal, so within

one standard deviation and abnormal, so outside one standard deviation or even two and three

standard deviation moves in consumer and producer prices.

Now, it's always obviously good to know the level of inflation in the economy, but as traders and PMs, we, of course, we'd rather want to predict inflation rather than react to it.

So we must remember, we've got to remember that the CPI and the PPI are coincident indicators and not leading indicators.

Commodities prices themselves lead the commodities price indices. So each month,

by the time you analyze the monthly indices for our three inflation numbers, the CPI all items,

the CPI x food and energy, and the P Commodities, really, there should be no surprises

because for the previous month, you will have been on top of all the major commodity price moves.

And they occur in real time in financial markets.

Now, if you're sitting there thinking to yourself, Anton, this is all great, you know, about inflation, etc.

But I really can't be bothered downloading all the data and doing all of the work to figure out what is a normal and abnormal move for all three of these inflation indices.

inflation indices? Well, if you're thinking that, unfortunately, you're defaulting to a position of not being a self-starter. But seeing as though it's early days in the educational process,

we do have a downloads area and we've done the work for you. But I would encourage you to go into the inflation, CPI, and PPI file and go through

the formulas and work out how the data is all set out and work out from the formulas

how the sheet actually works. And you'll see the method is exactly the same

as when we looked at M2 money supply

and when we looked at, in the IPLT video series,

the various tradable instruments across asset classes.

So what you should be doing first is obviously downloading

the inflation CPI and PPI file, looking at how it's

all worked out, and then actually running through the process yourself and just practicing. So in

the same way that you practice the method with

the M2 money supply data and tradable asset data.

You need to do this with inflation data as well.

We also have some other downloads.

There's multiple downloads for this video.

We have our cyclical commodity prices.

We have our commitment of traders reports for metals and energy.

We also have our US dollar trade weighted index analysis and we also have

a summary file. And by the way, all the data sources are included in the files. So for example,

the links that were on the screen earlier for inflation, they're all included in the file

and you can just easily click on them. But let's start with cyclical commodity prices.

In the downloads area, in the sheet for cyclical commodity prices,

you're going to notice that we've covered a whole bunch of them. So we've got oil, copper, lumber and iron ore. So in oil, we're covering WTI and Brent and the WTI

Brent spread. For copper, there's multiple contracts that trade globally. And we've covered them all

in the downloads area. So there's copper that's traded on COMEX, copper that's traded on the

London Metal Exchange, copper that's traded on the Shanghai

Futures Exchange. And then we're looking at various spreads. We're looking at the COMEX LME spread

and the LME Shanghai spread. For lumber, we're looking at the most popular contract,

the random length lumber contract, which is on the CME. And for iron ore, we're looking at two contracts in the downloads.

We're looking at the iron ore contract on CME,

and the iron ore contract in China on the Dalian Commodities Exchange, the DCE.

Now, what you will notice when you look at each of these cyclical commodities, you'll notice that we've downloaded

all the price data for each of those cyclical commodities. And in the same way, using the same

method that we use for the inflation data and the M2 money supply data and all the other tradable instruments that we looked at in the IPLT video

series, we've conducted a distribution of returns, statistical analysis on the cyclical commodity

prices. And we've done that to ascertain what is a normal, so within one standard deviation move,

and abnormal, so outside of one standard deviation move, and abnormal, so outside of one standard deviation move,

and looking at also two standard deviation

and three standard deviation moves

for each of those cyclical commodities

on both a daily and weekly time horizon.

Now, additionally,

In the downloads area, you'll notice a file called the summary file.

And this summary file puts all in one sheet the analysis of the standard deviation moves in all of the instruments that we're going to be looking at.

From minus three standard deviation move to positive three standard deviation move for basically all the tradable instruments in our cyclical commodity space.

Now, why do we do this? Why do we go through this exercise? Why is it actually important?

Well, cyclical commodities often move with the business cycle, so with economic growth.

often move with the business cycle, so with economic growth.

The clue is in the name, cyclicality.

They move with the business cycle.

So, if you think back to our other business cycle indicators,

so the ISM manufacturing, ISM non-manufacturing,

the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index,

building permits, and the NFIB, Small Business Optimism Index. If you think of all of those business cycle indicators that are leading indicators, cyclical commodities essentially move with them. They move and tend to lead as a gauge to the business cycle.

The cyclical commodity prices themselves are indicative of future CPI and PPI levels,

CPI and PPI levels, which are reported monthly, and future economic growth. So real GDP reported quarterly. So expansion and contraction in the economy. And of course, both real GDP and inflation

are reported after the fact. Cyclical commodity prices are open quotes leading close quotes because they are

trading and moving every day. And then inflation is reported monthly. And then economic growth,

real GDP is reported quarterly. And they are both reported after the fact.

are both reported after the fact. So let's think of an example here. So a leading indicator like the ISM manufacturing number may tell us at one point in time as traders that there is a

turning point occurring in purchasing manager expectations for the future. So what would that look like? Well, they may be reporting new orders growth after a contraction or growth is accelerating.

So there could be a turning point or a trend.

And this can be combined with, for example, growth in inventory stock

and increases their reporting increases in key input commodity prices to the manufacturing process.

So what does that mean?

Well, it means we're getting higher commodity prices.

And we have to assume here, as in the example, that we have a constant supply of the commodity.

So supply is not moving.

So we're concentrating on demand here.

So it means that there's higher commodity prices

given a constant supply in real time

because businesses are buying more input commodities

and this feeds into the inflation statistics later

when they're reported on a monthly basis

and prices by the time inflation is reported

have already moved.

So what we need to understand with cyclical commodities

is what is a normal and abnormal move

and use cyclical commodity prices as a gauge

to shifts in inflation expectations.

Now think in the bigger picture what we're trying to achieve here as traders and PMs.

From a macro perspective, we are always trying to gauge which way the wind is blowing

to enable a prediction of real GDP growth and likely S&P 500 direction and returns,

and of course, potential Fed policy. Why do we do this? Well, throughout the PTM video series,

it's been clear. We do this so we can position ourselves with the right directional bias. So,

the right directional bias. So a portfolio of a net long, net short or neutral positioning.

And of course, with the right longs and shorts in the portfolio. So this is how we use them as traders and portfolio managers, how we use cyclical commodities to make a more intelligent

decision around portfolio bias and potentially what we want

to be long and short in a portfolio. So we have to keep an eye on commodity prices and inflation

expectations and understand them and interpret them and what it all means at any one moment in time.

Now, we have to think about something else as well. For commodities themselves,

there are inventory dynamics, which has supply-side dynamics that we have to understand. So there is

a supply-side caveat here with cyclical commodities. So for commodities themselves, as inventories are rising,

this indicates a rise in demand. So business or purchasing managers are increasing demand

and increasing their own inventories. And we know that's a

bullish indication. On the flip side, if inventories are falling, this indicates a

fall in demand. So business and purchasing managers are reducing their demand and reducing their own

inventories. And they're consciously doing this for both cases. So rising inventories is indicating

a rise in demand from purchasing managers,

and that would be indicating bullish conditions.

And inventories falling,

that's indicating a fall in demand from purchasing managers,

and that is indicating, obviously, bearish conditions.

So for these cyclical commodities in the energy and industrial metals space, within these companies, there are internally traders of energy and industrial metals commodities,

and they are increasing or decreasing their stocking levels in accordance with actual and expected demand.

So, given a constant supply, prices that are increasing and decreasing are a gauge on business

or purchasing managers' actual and expectation of demand.

But there is a caveat to all of this.

Prices are, of course, a function of both demand and supply dynamics.

So, it's not an automatic function that prices must follow expected demand. Of course, there can also be cost push or supply factors

that we have to consider as to why prices are where they are at any one time.

And we'll come to this in a moment.

We have a PDF download to help with this.

But, however, we must always be on top of commodity prices and inflation expectations

and know why cyclical commodities are where they are.

This is our interpretation at any one moment in time.

Are demand factors outstripping supply factors or vice versa?

outstripping supply factors or vice versa.

And if we have a particular cyclical commodity where demand factors are very clearly

outstripping supply factors,

then of course, as traders and portfolio managers,

we're going to find that very useful as a leading indicator.

And if supply factors are outstripping demand factors at any one moment in time,

then it's going to be difficult for us to use that commodity price

as a leading indicator to potential future economic prices.

economic growth and stock market direction and returns.

Now, we have, as I mentioned, a PDF in the download area.

The name of that PDF is Cyclical Commodities,

Demand and Supply Factors.

And in the download, what you'll notice

is there's a whole bunch of sources and information relating to the

oil, copper, lumber and iron ore markets.

So you can essentially, at any one moment in time, analyze those factors and gauge whether demand factors are outstripping supply factors for the commodity price move.

So this is going to be a useful resource for you going forward. So when you see a

cyclical commodity price move, you can use the resource and determine whether it's a demand-led move or a supply-led move.

Now, obviously, earlier in this video, we looked at the CPI and the PPI, so the Consumer Price Index

and the Producer Price Index. And we're looking here in a bit more detail now

at the PPI All Commodities Index.

And we're going to look at the contributory data

behind this number.

If you look at the screen, you'll see at the bottom

of the page, you'll see a link that takes you

from the FRED chart and the download data area

on the FRED website for the PPI All Commodities Index. The link there takes you to the commodity

groupings that make up the headline index, which is the index currently on the screen. And when you click on that link, you get taken to

another page and the page shows you all of the commodities contributory indices that contributes

to the all commodities index. So you can see on the screen on the left hand side, you can see on the screen on the left-hand side, you can see all commodities under the heading goods.

So all commodities comes under this heading.

And then underneath all commodities,

you can see all of the various commodities

that contribute under the heading of goods. So under the category of goods, these create the index

for all commodities. Now there's other categories, there's other commodity groupings. So that's on

on the left-hand side, as you can see on the screen.

But on the right-hand side,

we also have services and construction.

And other commodity groupings and services and construction

are not included in the overall all commodities number.

The all commodities number comes under goods.

But if you look at, for example, other commodity groupings, you can see that a lot of the commodities that are listed there, there's a big overlap with the contributory indices that contribute to the all commodities number. So because there's a big overlap, the all commodities number

and the contributory data, because there's a big overlap, there's a very good representation

of the other commodity groupings inside the index. What isn't represented is obviously services and construction. Although many of the commodities that we see

on the left-hand side will be input prices to the construction industry. But let's recall

from our previous analysis of the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors of the economy

when we were analyzing ISM data. So if you recall, manufacturing makes up 20% of the US economy

and non-manufacturing, so services, makes up 80% of the economy. As traders and PMs, we don't have access

to tradable commodities that we can sensibly use

as leading indicators to all industries

within the service sector, and therefore,

the overall service sector.

However, we do have access to cyclical commodities

like oil, copper, lumber, and iron ore on a daily

basis. So although we don't get a perfect representation of services, the services side

of the economy, there's undeniably an overlap in certain areas. So services within certain

service sector industries are linked very clearly to final demand, like cyclical commodities.

There's an overlap in many areas. So for example, in real estate services, if there's, for example,

So for example, in real estate services, if there's, for example, a housing slowdown where we have lower building permits that are leading to fewer housing starts and housing completions, then naturally the demand for lumber will go down.

If we're assuming a constant supply, so there's no supply issues in the lumber market, then the lumber price will fall.

And real estate services, which are part of the service side of the economy, should slow down or contract.

So if we see, for example, deflation or inflation in a certain commodity price and it's demand-led.

If there's an overlap into the service sector, then of course, this cyclical commodity price

is potentially leading and overlapping many areas of the service sector.

So it becomes obviously useful to us as traders and PMs.

Additionally, we can always, of course, look at a particular service sector area

and look at the industry index itself to gauge inflation and growth.

index itself to gauge inflation and growth. So, for example, when you're looking at data sets and hunting around for data sets and index levels on the FRED website, you can look, for example,

at a particular index. And here we've drilled down to the real estate services sector.

And if you look on the left-hand side, at the bottom of the screenshot, you can see a link called Services, Real Estate Services Partial.

And when you click on that, so when you're on the index page and looking at the chart,

So when you're on the index page and looking at the chart, if you click on that link on the bottom, you'll be taken to a page that shows you allasing with land, brokerage fees and commissions. You can also see management fees and you can see residential property sales

and rentals, brokerage fees and commissions and also appraisal fees. So very obviously,

and also appraisal fees. So very obviously, if we're using lumber as one of our cyclical commodity prices that we're analyzing, if we get demand-led inflation or deflation,

this can be a good leading indicator to a particular sector like real estate services. So services, we do not necessarily have

or need the ability to be able to look at leading indicators that are directly leading into for

for example, real estate commissions and brokerage fees.

We know if there's a slowdown in the housing sector,

in the construction sector,

if lumber is falling, for example, and it's demand-led.

So using it in conjunction with our other leading indicators

that this is likely to feed into the real estate services sector

further down the line.

So even though for goods, for all commodities,

and the sub-indices for all commodities,

is essentially in the manufacturing sector,

there is a very obvious read across to many services.

One of the most useful things we can regularly do as traders or portfolio managers

is to stay on top of cyclical commodity prices like energy and industrial metals

and determine as a whole the general level of demand and use this as a guide to future

expected inflation and GDP growth. We are using it as a leading indicator gauge. Now, if you look

on the screen on the left-hand side, you will see the producer price indices for goods and in goods, all commodities.

And then you'll see the sub-indices for all commodities, which are farm products, processed foods and feeds,

and also industrial commodities. And within industrial commodities,

you will see further sub-indices.

So you'll see, for example, fuels and related products

and power, you'll see lumber and wood products,

you'll see metals and metal products,

and also industrial commodities less fuels.

And what we can do is if you look at the major subcategory,

which is industrial commodities,

we can actually, on the FRED website,

click on industrial commodities

and get taken to the page on the right-hand side,

which is the producer price index by commodity

industrial commodities

index. So this essentially isolates our industrial cyclical commodities as a group, as a whole.

And of course, we can always click in to the sub-indices like lumber and wood products,

to the sub-indices like lumber and wood products, metals and metal products, fuels and related products and power, industrial commodities, less fuels.

We can always click in to those sub-indices, bring up the pages and download the data and

really drilled out into the cyclical commodity indices themselves. But we look at the headline

level, the All Commodities Index, and we look at Industrial Commodities Index, which contributes

to the All Commodities Index. So using these indices as a leading indicator gauge, when cyclical commodities are viewed as a group, their relative price performance may show healthy or weak demand from cyclical industries of the manufacturing sectors of the U.S. economy.

of the manufacturing sectors of the US economy.

Now, prices may also go up or down based on supply side issues.

We mentioned this earlier.

If there is a constant demand and tightening supply,

prices will go higher.

That means we're getting inflation, okay?

So we're getting inflation from a supply issue, a tightening supply issue.

If there's constant demand, yet ever increasing supply, prices will go down.

So we have the opposite.

We have deflation from increases in supply given a constant level of demand.

increases in supply given a constant level of demand.

So if at any point in time we are analyzing cyclical commodity prices and indices,

what we have to understand is that if when we do our work, we determine that the price is moving, whether that increases or decreases.

If the price is moving because there's a supply-driven issue,

we must temper our ability to gauge future economic growth.

So basically, with supply-side-driven inflation,

cyclical commodities are going up in price, not because

of an overall demand increase.

In that situation, real GDP may actually fall because demand is constant.

In this particular cyclical commodity, we have a supply situation occurring. We have a supply issue that's causing the price

to go up and demand is constant. So in the future, the read-across into real GDP is a

small read-across. On the flip side, with supply-side driven deflation, the cyclical commodity price is going down,

not because of an overall demand decrease. It's going down because of an oversupply

of the commodity given a constant level of demand.

of demand. And even in that situation, when the commodity price goes down, real GDP in

the future may rise more than we expect. So when we have supply side issues in a particular

cyclical commodity, and we determine at any one time that this is probably the reason why a cyclical commodity is either going up in

price, so inflation, or down in price, deflation. The read across, we have to understand that the

read across in forecasting real GDP is going to be much weaker than if it was demand-led. If it's demand-led, then cyclical commodity prices

are indicative of future CPI and PPI levels,

which is reported monthly, so monthly inflation numbers,

and of future economic growth, so real GDP growth,

which is reported quarterly, so expansion and contraction.

So if at any one moment in time, we determine that a cyclical commodity price move is much more down

to demand factors than supply factors, then it has a direct read across to economic growth

and of course inflation.

And also because we know cyclical commodities prices

are trading every day,

then they are leading inflation and GDP stats.

This is essentially providing us as traders and PMs with another leading indicator

gauge to the economy. So in the downloads area, you will see the spreadsheet called commodity prices,

and you will see all the data for oil, copper, lumber, and iron ore. And you need to go through these spreadsheets

and look at the commodities price data and look at the distribution of returns analysis.

So the statistical distribution analysis for each one and understand the one, two, and three standard

deviation moves on a daily and weekly basis for each of the commodity prices, so each of the

commodity products. And you need to combine this with the information and sources in the PDF document for the corresponding

products for oil, copper, lumber, and iron ore, and learn about the supply and demand dynamics.

a combination of these resources. And in the future, when you're analyzing commodity prices,

you will understand what a normal move is and what an abnormal move is. And you will understand

what's driving the price. Now, something else you can use as an indicator for future expected levels of inflation and

growth is the commitment of traders reports for the cyclical commodities that we're looking at.

So let's have a look at what we call the commitment of traders of Traders Reports or CUT reports. We can use non-commercial transactions data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission,

the CFTC, as an indicator for professional money manager positioning in our cyclical commodities.

in our cyclical commodities.

So what this data actually is,

is the real positions, long and short,

of the smart money in the market.

It's the institutional and hedge fund money.

So when we analyze this, what are we getting? We are getting a sentiment gauge of future expectations

of inflation and GDP growth

from their positioning in cyclical commodities.

So we analyze this data regularly to get a sense leading gauge of future expected inflation, GDP growth,

and general stock market direction. Specifically, what we want to know is if the smart money are

long or short a particular cyclical commodity and by what magnitude. Now, these numbers have not fallen from the magic

fairy tree or fallen from the sky. They are real numbers. These are the real positions,

long and short of institutional and hedge fund money. They are real numbers. Of course, if hedge funds are positioned long, they are committed to the belief that the commodity will go up in price. Therefore, they are committed to cyclical commodity inflation and, of course, vice versa. This is why it is called a commitment of traders report.

This is why it is called a Commitment of Traders Report. And by the way, when you look at this data, what you also have to understand is that the hedge fund community have been through the same leading indicator analysis as you have throughout the PT and video.

series, they are looking at the same things. So the COT report data is useful because we can

calculate turning points in positioning in professional trader circles in the hedge fund

community. Therefore, we are determining professional trader or hedge fund sentiment and their inflation and potential

growth expectations because of the positioning that they currently have or changing in a particular

cyclical commodity. Now, how do we actually go through this data and determine inflation and growth sentiment from the hedge fund community?

Well, in the downloads area, you'll see the commitment of traders spreadsheet file.

And we cover the cyclical commodities space.

We've got all of our cyclical commodities in there.

And you'll see the numbers for each of the cyclical commodities on the screen here. We've looked at

copper as an example. And you'll see the four columns that we're looking at. We're looking at total open interest.

We're looking at manager longs, manager shorts,

and we're looking at the net long and short.

So what do we do?

We do our analysis by taking the open interest percentage change

on both long and short non-commercial hedge fund positioning

and work out the difference between the two. If we minus the percentage short positioning

from the percentage long positioning, we get the difference between the percentage of contracts

that hedge funds are long and short, which gives us the net.

And what this does is create a new dynamic that is known in professional trading circles as the flip.

The flip basically shows us when hedge funds flip from committing to being net long to net short, or net short to net long.

And it also shows us how committed is the commitment.

So the rates of change by which positioning is changing.

Now, if you look at the screen here,

as mentioned, we are using here copper as an example.

And you can see our four columns.

And you can see on the screenshot that we've taken,

we've taken this directly from the data

in the spreadsheet download.

And we're looking at the period, April,

2020 to August 2020. And you can see we've highlighted two weeks in the data, which is

the week of the 26th of May and the week of the 2nd of June. And you can see on the right-hand

side in the fourth column, you can see the flip occurring at this stage. So the flip occurs

in the week of the 2nd of June 2020. What this means is that the net positioning of the hedge

fund community in copper has gone from being net short to net long. So they've gone from being as the professional

trading community going from bearish to bullish. So right there in that week, you can see the flip

occurring. Now we can actually chart the commitments of traders data for the entire history and that's available in

the download as well in the spreadsheet file. You can have a look at this in the

spreadsheet and obviously also look at the data in all the columns that's

feeding this chart and you can see on the screen where the red arrow is pointing.

This is where the flip in copper occurred in the week preceding June 2nd, 2020, because the report is on the data for the previous week.

So, if you think about this chart in its entirety, and think about periods that we've looked at previously in the PTM video series. Think about the August 18 to

August 19 period. And think about the period when the Fed was cutting breaks over the summer of 2019.

And then the lead out of the turnaround in the economy in the second half of 2019.

in the economy in the second half of 2019. So think about that period.

You can see on the commitments of traders numbers,

when we look at 2018, we get a peak.

And then the hedge fund community

is getting less long in copper.

So they are less committed.

They are committed long, but less committed.

And then we get a flip going negative

during that August 18 to August 19 period.

We bounce around at the 0% bound for a number of months.

And then in the spring/summer of 2019, that's when bearish

sentiment or net short positioning in the commitments of traders reports or copper accelerates and

goes lower to a trough. And then we get a trough coming out of that trough when it seems the Fed's

actions began working. And the commitment of hedge fund traders, the hedge fund community,

gets less short. So they're still committed short, but get less committed. And then we get the flip that we just looked at,

where we get a flip positive in 2020 after COVID. We did get a flip before where the hedge fund

community did go positive at the end of 2019, beginning of 2020. But COVID was obviously taking hold in the first quarter of 2020.

And then we get the flip positive long back in June 2020.

And we see this data borne out in prices as well.

So we can look at the copper price and what was going on at these times visually on the chart.

So if we look at our cyclical commodity copper price during that period, mid-2018 to the end of 2019. You can see the copper price heading lower as the commitment of traders,

the hedge fund community gets less and less long and then flip to short and get bearish.

And then we have our recovery where we know during that period in 2019, where we had the Fed cutting rates

in July, September, October 2019, we know they started to take effect. The interest rate

cuts started to take effect. Our leading indicators were turning around. And then we have COVID.

And then COVID occurs, but then we get our flip aggressively

in the copper price from the hedge fund community

at the beginning of June.

So end of May, beginning of June 2020.

So at any one point in time, guys, for cyclical commodities, you need to be looking

at the commitments of traders' reports and analyzing the flip. The flip is where we tend

to have turning points in cyclical commodities. But you also need to look at the extremes.

So when the gap between positive and negative sentiment becomes historically wide either

way.

So we're looking at the peaks and the troughs in commitment of traders reports.

for cyclical commodities.

So when we have extreme positive,

it basically means that longs versus shorts

are at or near historical highs.

When we have extreme negative,

it's because the longs and shorts,

longs minus shorts are at or near historical lows.

So when we witness these extremities in cyclical commodities,

it can be a signal or a warning sign of potential turning points. However, guys, there is obviously

no rulebook here. Positioning and prices of a cyclical commodity can stay at extreme positive or extreme negative

for a long time before reversing. So don't take this as a rules-based scenario where, for example,

you're trying to connect things in your mind where you say, if I see, for example, the copper

commitment of traders peaking, then I should be looking to short copper stocks. That's not the

case, because the definition here of the positive data from the longs minus the shorts being at extremes and becoming slightly less extreme is simply the hedge fund community are still bullish.

They're just less committed than before. read into this and say, at, for example, a turning point from a peak or a trough, I should

directly read across into the stock market and say, I'm going to go short or long, for

example, copper stocks or construction stocks from lumber.

It's obviously doesn't work like that, guys. It's not a rulebook where you take positions simply based on the flip or the extremities

becoming slightly less extreme in the commitments of traders reports and directly reading across

into positions in stocks.

So definitely do not do that.

You have to do the proper work,

which is looking at the actual demand and supply dynamics as well

to see if this is the demand-led or supply-led in terms of price movement.

What you're doing with the Cyclical Commodities Commitment

of Traders' Reports is looking at sentiment

and looking at it in the context of your work

on the demand and supply dynamics.

And if you're seeing evidence that a commodity price move, a cyclical commodity price move,

if you're seeing evidence that it is demand-led and you're seeing evidence from the hedge fund

community that they are seeing it too and they are getting committed one way or the other,

then what does that mean? Well, it basically means that your cyclical commodity that you're using

can be used as a leading indicator for future economic growth and potential stock market

direction and returns. Now, something else we can look at is the US dollar trade weighted indices or TWI.

All major commodity benchmarks are priced in US dollars.

If we get a fall in the US dollar, this is generally inflationary, so prices going up

for our cyclical commodities. And when the US dollar is rising, this is generally deflationary, so prices going down for our cyclical commodities.

As traders or PMs, we have to keep an eye on the US dollar versus a basket or baskets of rest-of-world currencies as an indicator for expected CPI and PPI inflation in the future.

So if the US dollar weakens or strengthens,

we are likely to get higher or lower commodity prices.

And remember, turning points and trends in commodity prices must be backed by demand

evidence and data.

So commodity prices moving in the inverse direction to the US dollar move and inventory

levels rising or falling. Now, there's three trade-weighted US dollar indices that we look at, and they're

available in the trade-weighted spreadsheet file in the downloads area. And don't worry,

all of the links are in there as well. Our three indices that we look at, of three trade-weighted US dollar indices,

are firstly, the broad index for goods and services.

Secondly, the advanced foreign economies

for goods and services.

And third, the US dollar index

for emerging markets economies for goods and services.

And if you click through the links, for example, to the broad index,

you can see the weightings of all of the currencies of the US's trading partners that are used.

see the weightings of the currencies that make up the index. That's for the broad index,

for the advanced foreign economies and the emerging markets economies index. You can get

the weights if you follow the links to revisions to the Federal Reserve dollar indices, but you can use these as a guide for AFE and for EME as well.

And for example, like with our other indices that we've looked at, and we've done this many times now,

and you'll have seen this in other spreadsheets, you can go to the FRED website, have a look at, for example, the broad index,

and you can download the data. And yes, you've guessed it, you can run a statistical distribution

analysis, a distribution of returns on the trade-weighted US dollar indices. On the page

here, we have the broad index

and you can analyze, you know,

we've done the work for you here.

You can analyze, for example,

two and three standard deviation moves,

both on a daily basis, so using daily data,

and on a weekly basis using weekly data.

So daily data is on the left here and weekly data is on the right.

We can do that as well for the AFE index,

so the Advanced Foreign Economies Index.

Have a look at our standard deviation moves for daily and weekly data.

And we can do that for the emerging markets economies as well.

So the US dollar index, EME index,

and we look at the one, two, and three standard deviation moves to determine for each of these indices

what is a normal move on a daily basis and on a weekly basis

and what is an abnormal move on a daily and weekly basis.

And we look to this for trends and turning points.

So in the future, when you're looking at the data,

so daily and weekly changes of the trade-weighted indices,

and you see what could be an abnormal move when compared to historical data, you

will know that we are probably experiencing a change in macroeconomic conditions and potentially

inflation expectations and GDP growth expectations for the United States.

What we've also done for you, and I mentioned this previously in the downloads area, is we've

included a summary file.

Now, the summary file for all of our cyclical commodities and for the US dollar trade trade

weighted indices calculates beautifully all in one screen for daily and weekly data the one two

and three standard deviation moves in the negatives and the positives for all of our products so this

is data that you're going to be updating when new data comes out And you'll be doing this on a regular basis.

And when you look at the price data of cyclical commodities and when you're putting it into the context

of demand and supply dynamics,

looking for demand-led price moves,

and when you're looking at it in the context

of the commitment of traders' reports

and the trade-weighted indices, you're going to have

a very clear picture of what's going on and using the cyclical commodities prices in themselves

as leading indicators. So, in summary, cyclical commodities prices.

As traders and PMs, we have access to them. We have access to several cyclical commodities prices that can act as leading indicator gauges to levels of future inflation, real GDP growth and stock market direction and possible returns.

We have to keep on top of them, guys. real GDP growth and stock market direction and possible returns.

We have to keep on top of them, guys.

We have to keep on top of the most common cyclical commodities prices in both the energy and industrial metals spaces.

So in the oil market, copper, iron ore,

and in addition, lumber in the construction market.

We have to be on top of them

and we have to gauge demand, supply, and inventory dynamics.

Also, when we're analyzing prices,

we need to look, when we're looking at

cyclical commodities prices,

to normal and abnormal moves

as clues for turning points and trends

of inflation and growth expectations.

We have to keep on top of the commitment of traders reports of the cyclical commodities

in order to gauge what the smart money sentiment of inflation and growth expectations is at any one moment in time in the market.

And we also regularly have to keep an eye on the US dollar trade-weighted indices for normal

and abnormal moves for turning points and trends. And of course, even though they are

coincident indicators, we will also be on top of

monthly inflation numbers. We will be on top of CPI and PPI and we will know what

normal and abnormal moves are that show up in the later months.

monthly releases. So, taken together with our other leading indicators, understanding

and being on top of both normal and abnormal moves in our cyclical commodity prices and

the US dollar trade-weighted indices, plus also knowing market sentiment from the COT reports,

gives us an additional leading edge and gauge to predict future inflation,

GDP growth, stock market direction, and potential returns.

These are useful indicators, but we have to understand the context that we have to view them in.

As long as we know that they are useful indicators going forward at any one moment in time that we

can add to our leading indicator list.

Okay, so in video 11, we covered the NFIB, SBO index and why it's useful. And then we made a jump. We jumped from surveys in the United States to analyzing cyclical commodity prices. So why did

we go and do this? Well, there's two main reasons. Firstly,

at this stage, after we've covered money markets and surveys in the United States,

it's the right time in terms of your educational development and progression to get an understanding understanding of inflation and supply-side factors. Inflation is downstream from both demand

and supply, but supply-side factors can affect leading indicators, especially in the manufacturing

sectors. So commodity prices and understanding them, so cyclical commodity prices, understanding

them, it gives us a gauge on future levels of inflation and therefore real GDP.

So gross domestic product adjusted for inflation.

So it also not only gives us that, it gives us, obviously, if we understand real GDP growth

direction, we get a better understanding of stock market direction, and we also get a better read

for our portfolio bias. We just have a general, overall, better understanding of what's going on in the economy. Secondly, cyclical commodities

are not just quoted in US dollars and tradable in the United States.

They are also traded in other geographies around the world. And

they're denominated in those geographies in different currencies. So we will be moving on to

international surveys next. So at this juncture, again, in terms of your educational development

and progression, covering cyclical commodities is the right thing to do here. Now, in the downloads

area, there are multiple spreadsheets for analyzing cyclical commodity price

data, but also there's a PDF which outlines all of the supply side factors to take into consideration

when analyzing the data.

So that's really there for you to determine at any one time whether a move is demand-led or supply-led. So bring yourself up to speed

with all of those resources and watch the video over again if you need to. Okay, so we're going to move on now

to international surveys. So we're going to be looking at leading indicator surveys in both Europe and China. So in video 13, we'll be looking

at Europe and in video 14, we'll be looking at China. So let's shoot over straight away to video

13. Let's get straight into it. And I'll see you at the end of the video back at the desk.