Okay, so welcome to video number 25. We will continue now with our trade idea generation

process. And we are still in the quantitative phase. So we are continuing going through our

quantitative processing. And this is video number four of

Quant Processing. In the next two videos, we're going to be looking at long ideas and short

ideas and the mechanics of the quant. So let's start with the mechanics of long trade ideas.

mechanics of long trade ideas. Now, just to put everything into perspective so you understand exactly the entire process and where everything fits in, we have our leading indicator dashboard

initially. And this was for establishing a portfolio bias. So we have our US leading indicators. So US money markets,

US surveys, and US cyclical commodity prices, denominated in US dollars. And then we also have

our international leading indicators. So international money markets, international surveys, and international cyclical commodity prices.

So this is our macroeconomic leading indicator dashboard.

And our macro work that we do as traders is to establish our portfolio bias.

So we covered an entire section in the PTM video series on macroeconomics and how to establish that portfolio bias.

We also covered foundations of portfolio management with Chris Quill to introduce you to concepts that are required in order for you to appreciate why professional traders use process in the way that we do. We covered the fundamentals that pro-traders focus on also in the quantitative

phase at the microeconomic sector and stock level when generating potential trade ideas and introduce you to some new ways of thinking

about those fundamentals.

So things are starting to come together

in the overall trade idea generation process.

Now, in the previous section,

throughout when we were processing quant fundamentals, we assumed that in the background, we had already

been through our macroeconomic processing, and we had established a macroeconomic view. And as any one

moment in time in the future when you are processing in the quant phase, you will have a

macro view that's already in place and you will have already established a portfolio bias. Here,

we are going to assume that you have recognized that the world is in a cyclical upswing,

that you are forecasting real GDP expansion with Fed target inflation intact,

and that your portfolio bias is net long,

and you want to be aggressively long growth stocks in your portfolio.

Now, of course, this will change over time.

However, at this stage,

we need to make an assumption here

in order to continue demonstrating

how the process actually works.

So we're going to make this assumption

that we want to have a net long bias in the portfolio.

And what we're going to be concentrating on in this video is earnings growth and specifically earnings growth profiles.

have our quantitative and qualitative dashboard, which is our microeconomic filtering process in both quantitative and qualitative metrics when we're generating trade ideas.

So we are marrying up the macroeconomics and the microeconomics to generate potential trade ideas.

And you will be able to use the micro and the micro,

so the quantitative and qualitative dashboards,

going forward as process checklists

throughout your trade idea generation processes.

Now, as mentioned, we are still at this stage in the quantitative

phase. And we will be looking now in this video at the actual mechanics of how you go about

in filtering the data and essentially drilling down throughout the US stock market to get potential long ideas.

We're going to be looking at best practices to isolate positive outliers.

Now, also included in this video is going to be a demonstration from Chris Quill with an Excel lesson on how to implement these processes

both practically and efficiently.

So when you're doing this yourself on your own,

you can go through the processes

and get to very quick answers in identifying

identifying positive outliers. Now, never forget, in the background, in your minds, you have to

always be thinking of the overall pro trader systematic framework. So again, we are split

into two areas here, the theory and the implementation. And where we are right now

is in the quantitative processing phase of fundamentals.

We will, of course, come on to the qualitative phase later and qualitative processes.

But just remember for the moment, the overall pro-trader systematic framework

and where we're sitting right now in fundamentals.

It is the most important part of the trade idea generation process.

And if you recall, pro-traders are putting an 80% to 90% weighting on the importance

and the amount of work that they're doing split between fundamentals and technicals or timing. So timing comes next,

but it is only 10 to 20% of our overall work and importance of the overall process.

So fundamentals are the most important, 80 to 90%. But both fundamentals and timing have to be seen within the restrictive parameters of opportunity set and volatility.

What do we want as traders?

We want the biggest amount of opportunity set or amount of stocks possible.

And we, of course, want volatility.

Volatility is a trader's best friend and a portfolio manager's worst enemy. You will have learned this in the IPLT video series. If you haven't taken the IPLT video series,

I would encourage you to do so because this is how everything fits together.

mostly on fundamentals to generate trade ideas within the parameters of volatility and opportunity set. And of course, once we generate a trade idea, a trade idea then becomes a real position where we are taking a real money position in our trading accounts.

money position in our trading accounts. So the second stage of the overall pro-trader systematic framework is when we actually implement our ideas that have been generated by work

and research. And when we take positions.

off. They're either going to be winners or losers. And we're going to generate an overall

track record. And we're going to have trader metrics or statistics as to how effective we are

as traders. Now, for this video, we are in the bottom-up fundamental area in the quantitative bottom-up phase. So quantitative bottom-up process.

We are obtaining micro views based on fundamentals. So we're making this assumption that we have our

long, our net long portfolio bias in the background, and we are going to be looking at identifying potential long ideas

based on earnings growth profiles. In later videos in the PTM video series, so later within

the trade idea generation process, we will be looking, obviously obviously at qualitative processes,

which are the numbers and the qualitative information

with a company or a stock behind the quad.

So what is behind the quad?

What is behind earnings growth?

What is behind revenue growth?

What is behind valuation?

behind revenue growth? What is behind valuation? That is another level that's deeper in our work that we will be covering later. But for now, we're covering earnings growth to make sure that when

you're processing, you're doing all the right things and not getting into bad habits. So over the years, we've seen this

time and time again at ITPM, even from students who have gone through and understood all of our

teachings and understood all of our processes, but they always continue to look for the shortcuts.

The shortcuts are bad habits, guys.

So one of the worst habits that you can possibly have,

even if you have the right information

and understand everything that ITPM is teaching you,

one of the worst habits is going through a quantitative process

where you're attempting to do box-ticking exercises,

such as looking at earnings growth

and implicitly making the statement through your actions

that you've found a stock that has high earnings growth

and a high price earnings ratio relative

to its peer group. And then you miss all of the extra work. You miss all the interpretation.

And then you believe that because you've done that, you've just rearranged

some data and information in a spreadsheet,

that it becomes an automatic trade idea.

This is wrong.

You don't know anything about the stock.

You don't know anything else about it.

You know nothing at this stage.

So if you go and put a position on,

when you've done that work,

you're going to have absolutely no conviction

in your position, and the idea is incomplete.

It's way incomplete. So it is far at this stage, far from being an actual trade idea.

So this is wrong, guys. Please do not do this. You're looking for shortcuts. This is the lazy retail

trader default situation where you're thinking that if you rearrange the data in a spreadsheet,

you just filter for high earnings growth at high PE that the stock that's at the top of the table

becomes an automatic lock. It obviously doesn't. There's a lot more work to do.

The next bad habit here is only looking at familiar and comfortable blue chip names that you've heard of in the media that are very large market cap,

which essentially have low volatility. So they offer low risk and therefore low opportunity.

So you end up being invested in a market cap space, which is too high. So the risk reward or the opportunity is not skewed in your

favor. So it's time to start thinking of earnings growth in the context of market cap. So in the

context of mega cap market cap stocks, large cap market cap stocks, mid cap and small cap. The absolute number for

earnings growth absolutely matters to traders. So imagine for a moment, you're going through

your filtering processes and you find a large cap stock within a sector that you know,

you've heard of the company before.

So naturally, for some reason, people tend to gravitate to familiarity.

So imagine you're in this situation and you have a large cap stock

in a sector that you recognize and it's outperforming its peer group,

but it has 6% earnings growth. The

absolute number is still very low. Absolute earnings growth of 6% for a trader is just boring. Now, of course,

course, it could be an investment for the long term, but we are traders. A stock that is a large

cap stock with only 6% earnings growth to us is not a trade. It is not a trade with a one to three

month time horizon. You need earnings growth with catalysts that will move the price in a meaningful way in the next one to three months, 20 to 60 trading days.

Where is this more likely to happen in the stock market?

It's much more likely in the mid-cap space.

mid-cap space. This is where we're going to find a large opportunity set with volatile outperformers relative to the sector with high earnings growth. So with, say, 30% plus earnings growth,

and they can potentially beat to the upside in a meaningful way with multiple catalysts in between.

So, you have to stay away from these two bad habits when you're processing, looking for potential long trade ideas.

Stay away from the bad habit of only box ticking for earnings growth and PE

and just taking high numbers and then thinking that automatically becomes a trade idea. That's wrong.

You have to do a lot more work than that. And stay away from the next bad habit, which is

looking only at comfortable, familiar blue chip names that have low volatility.

You need to get into the good habits of a trader. Good habits of a trader, please. So let's start

thinking here about market cap as a filter

within the mechanics of potential long trade ideas.

A mid cap that has a market capitalization

of say $5 billion has more potential to double

and double quickly than say a mega cap

that has a $40 billion plus market capitalization.

As traders, we would much rather be long a mid-cap stock that has a $5 billion market

capitalization with, say, 30% plus earnings growth for the next year and the year after versus being long

a $50 billion mega cap stock that only has 12% earnings growth, for example, for the next

year and the year.

year after. The $5 billion market cap stock, the mid cap, has a lot more potential upside

than the mega cap stock at $50 billion. So $5 billion with say 30% plus earnings growth

has way more potential upside in a quicker period of time than the mega cap stock, the $50 billion stock with, say, 12%

earnings growth. Remember, in the stock market, money likes growth and dislikes a slowdown in growth, and even worse, a contraction.

So as traders, when we are going through the mechanics of identifying potential long trade ideas,

we are naturally going to gravitate towards growth and volatility.

Why? Because we need growth, and we need the money and the market

on our side and they like growth. That will drive price to the upside.

Additionally, we want volatility. We want to be operating where we have volatility and therefore risk and opportunity that provides

us with the chance to make outsized returns.

So in the US stock market, there are actually definitions for market capitalization. Micro caps in the US are less than $1 billion market cap.

Small caps in the US are defined as market caps

between $1 billion and $3 billion.

Mid caps in the US are defined as having market caps

between $3 billion and $10 billion. Large caps are market

caps between $10 billion and $40 billion. Mega caps are defined as any stock that has a market

capitalization of $40 billion and above. So, because we are traders and not investors, you have to start thinking in terms of your processes about what you want to be long and what you want to be short.

And therefore, you're going to naturally gravitate to certain areas of the market.

With your long ideas, you need to start concentrating on the $3 to $10 billion

mid-cap space. And for your short ideas, you need to concentrate on the $20 billion plus market cap

space. So with

large caps and within mega caps. Why do we do this as traders? Well, because we like earnings growth

and we like volatility. And in the mid-cap space, earnings growth is generally greater than in large

and mega caps. So you have to start using market capitalization as a filter, as well as price

earnings ratio, earnings growth, and peg ratio. And really, what you're actually doing here is you're

using volatility as a filter. So the opportunity and risk of a potential idea.

the opportunity and risk of a potential idea. And the mid-cap space is ideal for the 20 to 60 day time horizon in terms of volatility. You will have learned this in the IPLT video series

if you've been through that. But also in the mid-cap space, the companies themselves, their business models are actually

proven. So if you ask yourself the question, well, why don't we look at small caps and micro caps?

Well, the small caps and micro caps in terms of the evolution of their business models,

in terms of the evolution of their business models,

the vast majority of them, their business models are not yet proven.

So mid-caps that possibly used to be small caps or micro-caps have now grown to become mid-caps. And in the mid-cap space, their business models are proven and the companies are still in the growth phase.

So it's the best of both worlds.

We get the growth and we get the volatility and we also get predictable, proven business models.

So there's not as much noise as in small caps and micro caps, we actually have meaningful fundamentals

that we can understand and do work on. Now, when we are going through our mechanical processing

of the quant and we're identifying positive outliers in the mid-cap space that may or may not end

up being potential longs, we are always looking first, as we've mentioned in previous videos,

at price earnings ratio and earnings growth percentage. Earnings growth is usually, but not in all cases,

the most important factor

and is going to drive high price earnings ratio

and peg ratio values.

Earnings growth is relatively,

it will most of the time drive valuation.

So when you're going through your quant processing phase,

you're going to find a lot of the time

that when earnings growth is high,

this usually means that the market

is willing to pay a premium for that growth.

And you will see this as evidenced by a high PE and PEG ratio.

Now, this is a best practice identification process when we're looking for the classic

long stock setup. So, when we're looking at growth names, of course, there are other types

of long ideas for different types of market conditions and portfolio bias. But when you're

learning and you're setting out on the journey of learning how to identify trade ideas and potential longs,

it's important that you first learn the classic long idea,

bread and butter identification process or setup.

We are going to look later,

as we go through the trade idea generation process,

we're going to look later at different types of longs as well.

But for now, the most important thing is to learn the bread and butter, the majority default

long growth identification process. And as a reminder, we are going where the juice is, where the juice in the market exists, because we are

traders. We look at the US stock market, and we have 2200 plus available stocks to us to potentially

generate in terms of trade ideas and end up taking positions in. We have different types of sectors which fall into the

categories of cyclicals and defences. And we have different types of stock dynamics, different types

of stocks. We have growth stocks, we have ex-growth stocks, and we also have value stocks.

and we also have value stocks. As traders, we are going to lean and be attracted to,

on the long side, growth stocks naturally. And not only just growth stocks, but stocks that provide us with opportunity, with upside and outsized returns. So we are going to gravitate towards stocks

that are positive outliers in a sector,

so they're going to outperform the sector

and outperform the market in a positive GDP environment.

Now, we do have a

download that accompanies this video. If you go to the downloads area, you'll find the downloaded file,

earnings growth profiles for longs. Inside the file, once you've downloaded it, you're going to see in

there the earnings growth profiles that we look at through a long lens. And we're going to look at these

through the rest of the video now. But first and very quickly, you have to understand

the valuation backdrop, which is the ideal setup in addition to earnings growth long profiles

that we look for. So if you think about price earnings ratios,

and you think of the first period and the second period.

So the first period being the current year,

and the second period being next year.

So we have PE1 and we have PE2.

So we have PE1 and we have PE2. And PE1 is simply the current stock price of the stock divided by the forward estimate of EPS for the current year.

And PE2 is the current stock price divided by forward-looking EPS

for the following year, next year.

So the ideal setup that we want to see from a stock

is obviously to see EPS growing.

So in the second year,

if we divide the current stock price with EPS of the second year, if we divide the current stock price with EPS of the second year, we're going to get

a lower PE ratio than the first year because we're dividing by a higher number. So the EPS is higher

in period two, therefore using the same stock price for period 1 and period 2, the P/E ratio in period 2 is going to be lower than period 1.

Additionally, what we want to see is in both periods, the P/E ratio for the stock is higher than the P/E ratio for the sector.

is higher than the PE ratio for the sector. Now, how do we work out the sector PE ratio?

Well, we need a mean average EPS estimate for the sector.

And we do this by adding up all of the EPS numbers

in each period, PE1 and PE2, and then dividing by the amount of stocks in the sector.

When we see in both periods that we have a higher PE premium to the sector from the sector,

stock, it means we have confirmation of the valuation that the market is pricing a premium

of the stock in valuation terms versus the sector. This gives us evidence that the market

likes the stock and is prepared to pay for the growth and pay a premium to the sector.

What you will also notice is that the PE ratio in period 2 for the sector is lower than in

period 1, which means the average earnings per share of the sector is increasing from period one to period two.

Earnings per share is increasing for the stock as well over the two periods, but the stock

trades on a premium to the sector for both periods. So this is the ideal valuation backdrop when we're processing, looking for long

ideas, when we're doing our quant processing. So we have a stock in the sector that is trading in period one and period two

on a premium to the sector,

and it has higher EPS in period two versus period one.

Now, in tandem with this, the ideal situation

when we're doing our quant processing

and looking for long ideas, the ideal setup is not only

to have a PE premium on the stock versus the sector in period one and period two, where

we have EPS going higher. What we also want is the ideal earnings growth setup. So we have our two periods,

earnings growth one, which is the percentage increase in EPS from period zero to period 1. So, EG1 percentage, the percentage increase in EPS from last year to current year.

So, EG0, last year's EPS that is reported, and the percentage increase to period one, which is an EPS forward-looking estimate,

and the percentage increase from zero last year reported

to current forward-looking year one.

And what we want to see from EG1

percentage is that the company's earnings per share is growing at a faster rate than the sector

earnings growth percentage increase rate. You'll also notice here as well that the sector

is growing positively so the earnings growth with the sector average is actually growing as well.

So in an ideal backdrop, what we want to see is that the sector earnings growth is growing faster in EG2 versus EG1.

And then when you have a look at the stock itself,

you want to see in earnings growth two that the rate of growth for the stock

is faster in earnings growth two

versus earnings growth one,

but it's also higher than the sector rate of growth in EG2 period. So, the

earnings growth for the stock is faster than the sector in both periods, but for the stock

itself, it is faster in the second period versus the first period.

And what we call this when we just look at the stock itself, so in absolute terms, we

call it sequentially positive earnings growth momentum. And when we look at it in comparison relative to the sector, we call it sequentially

positive above sector average earnings growth momentum. The easiest way to think of this

is that the stock, the company itself, its earnings are growing faster than the sector in both periods.

And in period two, the rate of increase for the company itself is faster in period two versus period one.

So we have earnings growth momentum.

growth momentum. So this is the ideal scenario that we are looking for, obviously other earnings growth profiles that are available

to all traders and indeed all investors. Now, we are going to look at 10 different earnings

growth profiles in absolute and relative terms to the sector. And it's just important for clarity

purposes to understand that as traders, what we are really interested in from a momentum perspective,

because we're not investors, we're not looking at holding on to positions for years.

We're looking at the 20 to 60-day time horizon, and we need momentum.

So when we're looking at profiles, earnings growth profiles, through a long idea lens,

a long idea processing lens.

What we are interested in, in the first place, is having positive EPS.

And then on top of that, we want positive earnings growth.

Now we're going to look at 10 cases here where we look at different earnings growth profiles, both in absolute and relative

terms. Eight of them, we have positive EPS. So we can have positive EPS and we can have

negative EPS. So negative is when the company is loss-making. Positive is when the company is making profits. Primarily, we are

interested as traders, from a long-idea perspective, in companies that are making money in both periods.

And on top of that, we are looking for evidence of earnings growth percentage momentum.

So we have our first case of an earnings growth profile.

This is the one we have looked at already,

which is the sequentially positive earnings growth momentum, the ideal scenario.

earnings growth momentum, the ideal scenario. So we have in the first period, current year,

forward-looking estimates of EPS. We have positive EPS and we have earnings growth above sector average in the first period. In the second period, we have more positive earnings growth than in the first

period. And we are above the sector average again in period two. So this is the ideal scenario.

The next best thing is case number two, where we have, again, the companies making money.

Case number two, where we have, again, the companies making money, we have positive EPS, but we have positive above sector average earnings growth for EG1.

And then in period two, EG2, we have positive earnings growth.

for the company that's the same or around the same level as it was in period one. But again,

we are above the sector average even in period two. And the next best earnings growth profile

after that is our case number three, which is positive earnings growth percentage that is above sector average

in period one.

So yes, of course, company is making money.

We're making profits.

And the earnings growth in EG1 is above sector average and in the second period, the earnings growth percentage for the company

itself is less positive than in the first period, but it's still above sector average.

Now, these are our three most favorite earnings growth profiles when we are looking for logs because what it does

is it provides us with evidence that the market likes the stock better than the sector from a

valuation perspective. So money is liking the stock. So we have the market on our side.

So we have the market on our side.

And in the background, we have evidence of either earnings growth momentum that's sequentially positive or positive EPS growth that is higher than the sector.

So the valuation and the earnings growth is supportive that the market likes the stock better than the sector.

And it's important to remember here just so there's no confusion.

The PE profile that is ideal is still intact even in case number two and case number three. Because for example, in case number two,

where in period one, we have positive above sector average earnings growth, what we're looking at

is a percentage number and then a percentage number again in the second period. So even though the EPS growth is positive

and the same in percentage terms,

the EPS itself is still going higher,

which means the second period PE ratio

using today's stock price will still be lower than period one. Now once we start getting out

of the top three earnings growth profile characteristics, we start to struggle as trade

traders to justify why we would have these positions fundamentally, why we would even

generate them as an idea even to begin with. So let's have a look at case number four, five, and six.

So case number four, positive EPS, that's at the sector average in both periods. Well, in that situation, by default, we would probably have the opportunity

cost here to simply own the sector. And we're looking at this through a long idea lens.

As traders, we obviously want better than this. We can go to multiple other sectors

and get sequentially positive earnings growth momentum

in case one,

or even get earnings growth profiles

from case number two and case number three.

So case number four, we can do better than this.

Why would we want to do that as traders when we can go into other sectors and we can find case number one, two and three, where we have better fundamentals for a long idea?

Case number five is positive EPS growth that is below sector average in period one.

growth that is below sector average in period one. And in period two, positive EPS growth that is at or above the sector average. Even in this situation, we have opportunity cost to simply

owning the sector because in the first period of the current year, forward-looking EPS growth forecasts

are below sector average.

Again, we obviously want better than this case.

And in case number six, in period one,

we have positive EPS growth,

that is below sector average.

And then in the second period,

we have positive EPS growth, but that is below sector average. And then in the second period, we have positive EPS growth, but that is below

sector average again. So even worse, we have a very strong relative opportunity cost to simply

own the sector here. Again, we want better than that case. So let's have a look at these earnings growth profiles visually.

We've already seen the first one, our first case, which is sequentially positive above sector

average earnings growth momentum. With our PE backdrop, our valuation backdrop, this is the ideal setup, fundamentally, when we are long

idea processing as traders. Next up was our second case, where we have positive earnings growth. So,

earnings growth percentage in EG1, so in period one, that is higher than the sector average.

And then in period two, for the stock itself, we have the same level or around the same level

of earnings growth percentage for the stock as in period one, but it's still higher than the sector average.

And notice as well that the sector average is going up.

So in all of these cases, we have a sector tailwind.

And remember, in the background, we have a positive GDP environment.

Let's have a look at our third case.

Our third case is where we have, in the first period, the stock having higher earnings growth in percentage terms than the sector. And of course, the sector is positive earnings growth percentage as well.

And then in the second period, the stock has lower earnings growth, but still positive and

still higher than the sector earnings growth, even though the sector earnings growth is positive

as well.

And the sector earnings growth is higher than in the first period, which means again, we have a sector earnings growth tailwind and we have positive earnings growth that's higher for both periods for the stock itself.

for the stock itself. Now, once we start moving out away from these types of profiles,

this is where things start to become non-optimal for traders. So this is our case number four,

where we have positive earnings growth for the stock in both periods, but it's at all around the sector average. And I've purposely put on this chart in the second period a

slightly higher bar for the stock in terms of EG2 percentage versus the sector

EG2 percentage. You'll see that the sector comes in at 16% and the earnings growth

profile for the stock in period two comes in at 17%. A 1% difference really is no difference.

It's basically the same. So when we have this type of situation, it's not ideal. We'd be probably better off on a risk-adjusted basis

just owning the sector.

And when we're looking for long ideas

to potentially go into our portfolio,

our job as traders is not to own the sector.

job as traders is to do way better in our returns than the sector average. We are seeking here to

identify positive outliers in the sector. Next up is our fifth case, where in period one, we have

positive earnings growth, but it's below the sector average. And then in the second period,

but it's below the sector average. And then in the second period, positive earnings growth,

that's either at or above the sector average. And on the screen here, we've depicted it as above sector average. So in this scenario, yes, over a period of two years, we do get a swing in EPS growth from the stock that's more positive in the second

period than in the first period. And yes, it's higher than the sector in the second period,

but it's lower in the first period. So over a two-year period, the earnings growth of the stock relative to

the sector is pretty much the same. This is not an ideal situation for traders.

Again, on a risk-adjusted basis, we would probably be better off just owning the

sector for a long time. But as traders, that is not our job. We're

looking for positive outliers and we're looking to crush our returns.

Next up is our case number six, where for both periods, the earnings growth for the stock

is below the sector average, even though the earnings growth

is positive in both periods. And this is just not anywhere near ideal for us at all. We'd be way

better off just earning the sector. And again, that is not our job. So these are our first six earnings growth profiles, but we're looking at them through a long idea processing lens.

Now let's have a look at our next four, which we split up into two parts.

So 7 and 8, case number 7 and 8, we have negative earnings growth, but we still have positive EPS.

And case number 9 and 10, we have negative earnings growth, but we actually have negative EPS.

So the company is loss-making in case number 9 and case number 10. In cases number 7 and 8, EPS is still positive, but there's negative earnings growth in the

first period.

So let's start with case number seven.

We have positive EPS, but we have negative earnings growth and it's below sector average.

In the second period, we have positive earnings growth and it's below sector average.

Obviously not optimal for traders.

We have opportunity cost to simply owning the sector. In case number eight, we have positive EPS,

but we have, like in case number seven, we have negative earnings growth that's below the sector

average in period one. But in period two, we have positive earnings growth that is either at or above the sector average.

Now, how do we characterize this type of earnings growth profile?

Well, we characterize this as what we call in the industry a turnaround story. And for traders, because of the swing, the magnitude of the swing from negative

earnings growth to positive earnings growth, being above the sector average in the second period,

but coming from below the sector average in the first period, the magnitude of that move

gets our attention. So this could be worth looking at a turnaround story

as a different type of trade for our portfolio

versus the classic long setup.

So this is a different type of setup that as traders,

we could look at.

Our next case, case number nine, is also a turnaround story.

And it has even bigger magnitude move

because in this situation,

the company is loss-making to begin with in period one.

And in EG1, they have negative earnings growth. That's below the sector average.

And then moving into period two, they have the biggest swing from negative EPS and negative earnings growth.

So loss making a negative earnings growth below sector average to having positive earnings growth above the sector average.

So this is a very big move in EPS. This is the widest move we can have.

It's another turnaround story. And for traders, it may be worth looking at, again, as a different type of trade for the portfolio.

But these types of EPS growth profiles, case number eight and case number nine,

the turnaround stories, it does come with a capital.

It is very opportunistic and very dangerous at the same time.

So it's high risk, high reward, and high risk, potential, high loss.

And then we have our 10th case, which is where in period one,

the company has negative EPS, the company is losing money,

but they also have negative earnings growth. That's below sector

average. And then in the second period, we essentially have the same situation, but the

company gets either at or below sector average earnings growth. So negative earnings growth

in period two, like in period one, but in the second

period, it's either at or below the sector average. This just isn't worth looking at at all. Now,

from a classic kind of portfolio management perspective, this is the type of earnings growth profile that could provide investors with a hedge

to a high quality long idea in the same sector.

However, we are not investors and we are not in the hedging game.

We want to be, as traders, long, great stocks that go up a lot. And we want to be short, terrible, crappy stocks that go

down a lot. We always should be looking to optimize. So we do not go into positions, into long positions,

and then put short hedges against them. We don't need them because as traders,

we should be always looking for shorts

that are actually going down, looking for bad stocks.

So we'll learn about this in the next video.

We want to be keeping volatility high in the portfolio

and correlation as low as possible.

And we want to be avoiding hedges wherever possible. We would much rather be short cross sector than intrasector and shorting stuff just for

the sake of shorting it to have a hedge. So shorting something in the same sector just because

it's in the same sector and it looks bad on paper,

isn't the way we want to go. We would much rather be cross-sector and shorting genuinely bad stocks

that are going to go down, rather than looking for a generic hedge in the same sector.

And when looking for shorts, we should be looking at much higher market cap.

And as mentioned, more of this will come later in the next video.

Now, let's have a look at cases 7, 8, 9 and 10.

10 visually, so we fully understand them.

Case number seven, which is our negative earnings growth,

that's below sector average in the first period.

But remember, this case still has positive EPS.

So we have the negative below sector average earnings growth in period one. And then in period

two for the stock, we have positive earnings growth percentage, but it's below the sector average.

In this situation, this type of earnings growth profile, when we are processing in our quant for longs is pretty useless to us

as traders. We are not optimizing. Our next case is case number eight, which is our first

turnaround story where again, this company has positive EPS, but in the first period they have negative earnings growth that's below the sector average.

Then in the second period they have positive earnings growth that's around the sector average.

So what's happening to this company is that they're having a year where their earnings growth is negative and then they're turning it around and it's going positive and it's forecasted to be somewhere around the sector average in the second period, year two.

We would define this as a turnaround story. Now, our next case,

case number nine, is our turnaround story on steroids. So it's our turbo turnaround story.

This is the earnings growth profile where the company is actually loss-making.

They have negative EPS and they have negative earnings growth that's below sector average in the first period.

And then in the second period, they have a massive turnaround in EPS that goes from negative EPS to positive EPS, and they have extremely high positive earnings growth. That's way above the sector average. So these turnaround stories,

case number eight and case number nine, because of the magnitude of these moves in earnings growth, they do get our

attention and they could be quite interesting to us as traders, as different types of long earnings growth profiles.

that we could potentially have in our portfolio

to diversify our earnings growth profiles

and to diversify the types of long trades

that we have in the portfolio.

We will be discussing this in subsequent videos

further in the video series.

Next up is our case number 10,

where, again, like case number 7,

this is pretty useless to us.

But in this situation,

the company is loss-making.

So they have negative EPS in the first period.

Their earnings growth is negative

and below the sector average. And in the second period, their earnings growth is negative and below the sector average.

And in the second period, their earnings growth is negative

and it's either at or below the sector average.

In this situation, the stock may look like a short

versus a long idea in the same sector,

but we want to move away as much as possible

from having intrasector spread trades on within the portfolio.

We would much rather go to another sector

and find a genuinely terrible crappy stock that's going to go down

so we get the cross-sector element in our portfolio in terms of the overall

risk of the portfolio. So these are our 10 earnings growth profiles that we look at and we take actions on to optimize as traders.

In this video, we've looked at the mechanics of long trade ideas.

In the next video, we'll be looking at the mechanics of short trade ideas.

But let's close the loop here on long trade ideas. We always want to be optimizing and we want to be making sure that we have valuation and earnings growth that is evident that the market likes the stock that we're looking at when we're attempting to identify positive outliers in the sector. So if you think back to the tables that we looked at in

previous videos where we mapped out an entire sector and we had all of our

metrics that we look at in the spreadsheet where we had price earnings

ratio, earnings growth and we had peg ratio and market capitalization. Now, for long ideas, we will have

a market capitalization filter. We will always lean towards mid-caps. We are looking in that 3%

to $10 billion market cap space. What we will also filter for is what we filter for for long ideas

in our first step, like we did in previous videos. We will filter for PE and we will then filter for

earnings growth, both in period one and in period two. And what are we looking for in the ideal situation? We are looking

for PE on a premium to the sector in period one, and then PE on a premium to the sector in period

two, but the PE is lower in period two than in period one, both for the stock and both for the sector.

For both the stock and the sector, this is evidence that EPS is going higher.

And for the stock itself, it is evidence that the market likes the stock and prefers the stock

and pays a premium to the sector.

Additionally, we will filter for earnings growth percentage.

And what we want to see in the ideal scenario

is for the stock to have positive earnings growth

that is higher than the sector in period one.

And then in period two, the stock earnings growth in period two is higher than its earnings growth

in period one and higher than the sector.

Additionally, we want to see that earnings growth in the sector overall is actually trending

higher as well.

So for our case one, our ideal earnings growth profile for long idea quantitative processing

when we are looking to identify positive outliers, our ideal case, case number one, is for sequentially positive, above-sector average earnings growth momentum.

And when we're also working through our long idea processing, we also consider and identify our case number two and our case number three.

Now, all of these cases, as you know, we've identified as optimal situations for long idea

processing with the ideal being sequentially positive above sector average earnings growth

momentum.

average earnings growth momentum. But remember, in these three cases, the EPS is positive. We are not coming from a loss-making situation. The company is making profit. So we have positive

EPS and positive earnings growth in all of those cases. And this is, of course, evidenced

by the backdrop of the valuation in period two versus period one. So, a lower PE in period

two versus period one. The EPS is going to be higher in period two.

Therefore, when we take the stock price today

and we divide it by EPS one,

the PE is going to be higher in period one

versus when we take the same stock price of the current day

and divide it by EPS two.

Because EPS2 is higher, we're going to get a lower PE ratio versus PE1. We should always be thinking in terms of forward-looking fundamentals,

earnings growth momentum, and in terms of price momentum. So we try to concentrate on price and

the fundamentals and valuation that is behind price and that is driving price. So the difference

between PE2 and PE1 is the gap that the stock needs to go up to maintain the same PE ratio. So it's the price

movement from period one to period two in order to maintain the same PE in period two as in period

one with the new forecasted EPS. So what is happening is the company, when they're moving from period one

to period two, they are hitting their EPS and earnings growth percentage guidance. And by the

way, this type of analysis also applies to PEG ratios. The difference between peg 2 and peg 1 is the amount that the PE ratio

has to go up from period 1 to period 2 in order to maintain the same peg ratio.

So this is how we always have to be thinking about it as traders.

We always want to be thinking in terms of price momentum and the fundamentals that are driving the price momentum and the potential upside over the period.

So when we are processing for our long ideas in our quant processing phase and we are identifying potential long trade ideas, we want to see really good, strong, sequentially positive, above sector average,

earnings growth momentum. And we also want to see evidence from the valuation, from the PE,

that the market is aware of this too. And they are paying a premium for the stock,

which means if the stock delivers in period two, or in the process of going from period one

to period two, it looks like increasingly that the stock is going to deliver

on its earnings. The price is going to close the gap and the market is going to pay the same

or higher valuation in period two versus period one. Now, in terms of processing mechanics for long ideas, I'm going to hand over now to Christopher Quill, who's now going to show you how to get the data, and how to organize it into a format that's suitable for traders

to identify positive and negative outliers, and shortlisting potential longs and shorts.

So Chris is going to show you how to rank for PE and earnings growth in order to identify the earnings growth profiles that we

lean towards as traders. Now, there are downloads for this video in the downloads area. I mentioned

one previously, which was the earnings growth profiles for longs spreadsheet. You can download that, have a look at the different earnings growth

profiles and familiarize yourself with all of the different earnings growth profiles for longs.

There's also another download, which is the US Sector Data spreadsheet, which is the spreadsheet

that Chris is going to show you how to build and maintain now.

Now, please note, as a side note, this step does come after something that we call cleaning the data.

This is something that we're going to discuss in further PTM videos. So I'm going to hand it over to Chris now. Enjoy Chris's section of the video,

and I'll see you in the next video when we are going to start covering short ideas,

and we're going to look at the mechanics of short ideas.

Hi guys, and welcome to another spreadsheet class.

In this one what we're going to do is cover how you can download US stock data so that you can conduct your initial quantitative analysts to find outliers within sectors that could then be potential long and short ideas.

subject to further work of course. So what I'm going to go through is firstly how you can find

and screen for US stock data using a free service on Zaxx. From there what we're going to do is

download the screen results and start cleaning and manipulating the data in Excel so that we can go

through some analysis steps and I'm going to illustrate the process that you guys should be

going through to find potential ideas and outlier stocks using

examples and commentating on some of the things that Anton's been talking about in the presentations

as we go. Hopefully then you guys are going to have a good idea of what you need to do going forward.

Before we start guys, needless to say, the stocks and filtering that I'm going to go through in this

video are not

legitimate trade ideas that you can then put on in your own portfolios once you've watched the video.

The examples are only there to illustrate the process that you should be using and you know

of course the data will be stale by the time you watch the video anyway and above all else

the steps that we're going to go through in this video represent just the very beginning of the microanalysis process that's required to generate a legitimate trade idea anyway.

They are by no means, they by no means even represent the process of generating a fully fledged legitimate trade idea.

It's just identifying outliers. That's all we're doing in this video.

trade idea. It's just identifying outliers, that's all we're doing in this video. Remember guys there's a whole bunch more quantitative and qualitative

considerations that you guys need to think about before even putting a

position on as Anton's already been talking about in the presentations. So

with that being said let's get started. First things first we're going to

obtain the data that we need and to do that I'm going

to navigate to zax.com in my web browser.

Then at the top of the page there's a tab that you'll see called 'Screening' and if you

hover over that we're looking for the 'Stock Screener Tool' which is the second one down

in the drop down menu and once you select that it takes you to ZAK's US stock screen at all.

Now from this stage we want to start a new screen which we do by clicking the new screen

button indicated in the top left of this table and this is where we need to decide on the criteria

of stocks that we want to filter for within all US equities. We don't wanna add too much here since we will be filtering the data later in Excel,

but what we can say for sure

is that we're not really interested in any stocks

below $3 billion in market cap.

Remember for long positions,

we typically want to stay within the range

of three to 10 billion.

And for shorts, we're looking for stocks

with kind of over a 20 billion US dollar market cap.

So to add a market cap criteria we just go down to the market cap option here within the popular

criteria category and we want the market cap of the stocks we retrieve to be greater than or equal to

three billion dollars. So we just need to make sure that the mathematical operator here is set to

greater than or equal to as it is here. And then in the next column we want to enter the value of

three thousand. Now the reason why we enter three thousand here and not three billion is because we

can see that market cap values in this screener denominated in millions and so 3000 million

is equivalent to 3 billion. So from there we just click add to add the criteria to our

screen and once that's done we then need to add the various columns of data that we want

to be able to see for each stock once we run the screen. So here I'm talking about things

like market cap, stock price, earnings and so

on. To make those additions you'll need to click on edit view and start choosing the various data

items that you want within the different categories running down the left hand side. Now I suggest to

begin with you just follow along with the same criteria that I choose in this video and then

you can always expand on that if and when you feel comfortable to do so. So working down the categories on the left hand side I'm going to start in

company descriptors and in there I'm going to check the boxes for exchange, month and fiscal year end,

sector and industry. Okay those are the data items I want to see for every single stock.

Then I'm going to go to a different category, which is the size and share volume category. In there, I'm going to make sure that market

cap is already ticked. We want to know the market cap for every stock that we're looking

at as well. That's already ticked because we've already chosen that as an initial screening

criteria. So next we'll move on to the price and price changes category. In there I'm just going to check the last close box which is basically the last available

daily closing price for each stock.

Then we move on to EPS surprises and actuals.

Within that category I'm going to select last year's EPS value F0 and also the last

reported fiscal year for each of these companies.

And then finally our final category is going to be EPS estimates and in that section I want to make

sure that we check the boxes for the F1 consensus estimate and F2 consensus estimate which is

basically our forward-looking EPS estimates for each company,

F1 and F2, so our current and next fiscal years. So that's it in terms of the data items that we're

going to add to the screener. As I said before, as you get more comfortable with financial data and

your processes as a whole, you might be able to add in some additional items at this stage. But to

begin with, this is all

you need remember though it's important not to consider too many other metrics like revenue

growth or backward looking balance sheet and income state items until you identify outliers

with you know earnings growth p e and peg ratios

So don't get caught up with other metrics too early in the process even if you do decide to add them into the screener

Okay so let's continue now

To run the screen and download the data all you need to do is hit the run screen button here

That opens the screen's results on the web page and you can see that we've got 2467 stocks here matching our criteria at this stage and from here to download this

data and open it as an Excel file you just click on the CSV button and then open the

file. Now on my setup I can do this just by selecting the file that appears at the bottom

of the screen here. Depending on what your setup is you might have to navigate to the

downloaded file in a slightly different way but I'll leave that up to you guys.

All right so this is what the screen will initially look like when you open it in Excel

and you can see that we've got a little bit of work here to do first just to tidy things up

and reorganize the data before we move on to any analysis.

So to begin with what I'm going to do is select the whole of row 1 by clicking the row index value of 1 on the left hand side and then choosing to wrap the text in

those cells by navigating to home on the ribbon and then selecting wrap text.

And you can see now that when the text sort of wraps to fit within the column

title cells it's much easier to understand the data that we're dealing

with and we can actually read those column titles. From there I'm going to reorganize the column into a different order that makes a

bit more sense. To move a column all you need to do is select it by clicking on the column index

letter and then move your cursor to the edge of the selection before right clicking and dragging

the column to a different area then letting go of the right mouse button and choosing the shift

right and move option. So here for example I'm going to move the exchange column, the sector column and

industry columns all to the left before the market cap column. Then I'm going to move on to the last

reported fiscal year column and move that before

the last close column like this and to me that then all makes a bit more sense

now because from left to right we've got our stock names and tickers followed

by the company descriptors then fiscal year information and then finally prices

and then earnings. Okay so next what'm going to do here is adjust the column widths and row heights where necessary.

So for each column that needs it, I'm just going to click and drag its intersection with the column

next to it to expand the width of that column.

Just so that we can again read the data in those columns a bit more easily.

in those columns a bit more easily. After doing that, I'm then going to reduce the top row height a little bit and also make

the column headings in bold by selecting them and pressing Ctrl+B on the keyboard.

At this stage, let's go through these columns of data and actually just make sure that you

guys all understand what we're looking at here.

So in columns A and B, we've got the company name and ticker for each stock.

In columns C to E, we have the exchange the stocks are listed on, and then the sector and

industry to which the stocks belong.

These sectors and industries are defined by Zacks. Column F is the market cap for each company

in millions of dollars. Then columns G to H are fiscal year information. So columns G tells us in

which month each company has their fiscal year end and where a value of one represents January,

two is February, three is March and so on. And column H then tells us what the last

reported fiscal year was for each firm where the number represents the year followed by

the month in which it ends. So for example, if we look at Alcoa, the second stock from the top,

we can see that its fiscal year end is in December each year, and the last reported fiscal year was December 2020.

For reference to you guys, I'm filming this in October 2021, which will help explain some of

these figures, meaning we should see company's last reported fiscal year ends in the spreadsheet up to

around September 2021. Anyway, in the next column, we've got the last daily closed price for each stock.

And I think I'll rename this column while we're here and just call it price. Following that,

we have our earnings per share numbers for each stock where columns J through L represent the EPS

numbers for the previous fiscal year, the current fiscal year, and the next fiscal year, respectively.

Let's rename those now as well actually.

So in cell J1 I'm going to rename that column EPS0.

In cell K1 I'll rename that column EPS1.

And likewise in column L I'll rename the column EPS2.

Okay so that's looking better now but before we

go on to calculating things like earnings growth and PE ratios there's one

more bit of tidying up that we need to do. If you take a look at the exchange

column you'll notice that at the moment we have a bunch of stocks in this screen

that trade over-the-counter. Now as retail traders those stocks aren't really

accessible to us and so what

I'm going to do here is remove them all from this screen. To do that all you need to do is select

any one of the column headings and go to data on the ribbon followed by filter. That adds filter

options to all of the columns in our table and what we're going to do here is click on the exchange filter and then deselect the select all check box and then only

check the OTC and OTCBB options and then press ok. Once that's done you can see that it's returned

all of the OTC listings within our screen.

Now to delete those items we can just select all of the rows that you can see now and delete

them and the easiest way to do that is probably just by clicking the top row here and then

pressing Ctrl+Shift+down on the keyboard if you're on a Windows PC and then that selects

all of the data down to the bottom of the sheet.

Then you can just right click within that selection and go to delete row.

From there we just need to remove the filter in the exchange column so that we can see all of

our original data without the OTC stocks. And to remove that filter just select the filter and go to

clear filter from exchange. Okay before I forget now is probably a good time to remind you that

you should make sure that you save your work as you go because these screening sheets that you create will become pretty important to your workflow as a trader and you're going to want

to make sure that you can access them in the future to either keep working on the data inside them or

just as a log or reference to decisions and analysis that you've done in the past. Right let's

move on to calculations now. The calculations that we need to run are for earnings growth in cell Q1, and finally PEG2 in cell R1.

Then we can make all of those bold just by selecting them and pressing Ctrl B.

So let's move on to the actual calculations themselves now, beginning in the earnings growth

1 column. In cell M2, the formula that we want to

use for earnings growth for the current fiscal year is just going to be equals in brackets K2

minus J2 divided by ABS, the absolute function in Excel, in brackets J2. That's just basically the EPS1 number minus the EPS0 number divided by the

absolute value of EPS0. And it's important to make sure that you put the denominator in the

equation into an absolute function like this so that it's always positive. The reason being that

that helps keep the signs correct for the output of earnings growth,

irrelevant of changing signs in EPS numbers

from year to year.

Don't worry too much if you don't understand that,

just use this formula and take my word for it.

After the formula is inputted,

we can just copy it down to the end of the data set

in the usual fashion.

Then for earnings growth two,

it's done in exactly the same way

and actually we can just copy across the formula into the next column by selecting cell M2 and clicking and dragging

the little green box in the bottom right of the selection to the adjacent cell and then we can just

copy that formula down as well. Moving on to the PE ratio columns now, in cell O2 the calculation

for PE1 is just the stock price divided by EPS1. In cell P2, the calculation is basically the same

for PE2 as it was for PE1, except that we divide the price by EPS2. And that gives us the PE ratio

for the next fiscal year rather than the current fiscal year. So the formula here is going to be equals I2 divided by L2. So with those calculations entered we can just copy them down to the end

of the data set and move on to our peg ratios. So let's calculate peg1 now in cell Q2. The calculation

for peg ratio is just the PE ratio divided by the earnings growth expressed as a percentage for the same fiscal period.

So in this case, the formula would be equals O2 divided by in brackets M2 multiplied by 100.

We need to multiply the earnings growth figures we have here by 100 because currently they're expressed as decimals and we want them as percentages.

Okay, so now we can do the same for peg 2 numbers in column R and as with earnings growth we can just copy across the formula that we just defined for peg 1 into column R.

Remember though, whenever you do copy formulas across or down spreadsheets, it's always best practice to check the results. In this case, we can see the references are

looking at the PE2 and EG2 values this time, and so we know the formula is correct.

Okay, so that's our calculations done now, but before we move on to looking at a specific

sector and drilling down to find some potential

outliers let's just format these calculation columns that we've just created. So the earnings

growth columns we can just format as a percentage to two decimal places and to do that you can just

select the columns right click within the selection and go to format cells and then choose the

percentage category from the options and allow two decimal places and press OK.

Similarly, I think it's a good idea to format the PE and PEG ratios as well just to tidy things up a bit.

And this time I'm just going to format those as a number to two decimal places by selecting the columns,

right clicking in the selection, going to format cells and then we can just choose the number category and define two decimal places followed by OK.

So now that we've got all of the columns of data that we need, let's go through an example

of how you can find outliers that represent potential stock

ideas going forward. Now remember guys I'm saying potential here for a very good reason

because finding outliers on their own is not enough to represent a trade idea, it's just

the beginning of the trade idea generation process. Now in this section I will primarily

be showing you the process for identifying outliers on the long side but I might also

end up referring to a few things that you're actually still yet to cover in the video series.

Things like looking at short profiles, turnarounds and also data mining and processing mistakes.

Don't worry if you feel like there are some gaps in your knowledge at this stage.

Just come back and review this video again after you've completed the quantitative analysis section of the video series.

So for this example, the industry that we're going to look at

is the medical dental supplies industry. And so to begin with, we need to filter our data for stocks

just in that industry. And to do that, we first need to remove the previous filter we had by

selecting any column in any column heading rather and deselecting the filter button in the data

section of the ribbon.

Then, straight away, we're going to add it back again.

And you can see that this time the filters have applied all the way across our columns, including the new calculation columns that we've made.

From here, we want to filter the stocks that we're looking at by industry.

So that filter that we want to use is the one in column E.

With the filter option open we can search for dental supplies by typing into the text box here and you can see that once you've done that once you we've typed in dental supplies it just returns

one industry from our list which is the one that we want and we can then just press

OK.

Okay, so here you can see all the US listed stocks in the dental supplies industry that

come through this screener provided by Zaxx and at this stage we can start processing

and analysing the data to find outliers within the sector.

But one suggestion I have before we start is actually copying this data

into a new sheet in this file. The reason being that we want to keep our original screening sheet

clean and free from any further analysis or annotations. You can see currently that all

the rows that don't match our industry criteria are hidden in the left hand sort of row index,

but they still do exist in this sheet. So any edits or annotations that we do here will have

an effect on the original data set and we don't want that. So using a new sheet allows us to kind

of keep things clean and it also means that it's going to help with things like sector calculations

and so on which we'll get into shortly.

So copying the industry data into its own sheet is pretty easy.

All you do is just select it all, including the column headings, and then press Ctrl C

to copy it.

Then click on the plus button at the bottom of the spreadsheet to create a new sheet, and

then paste it into cell A1 in the new sheet with control V. From there you can also rename

this sheet that we've created to something that represents the data within it. So to do

that we can right click the sheet name at the bottom here and select rename and then call

it something like dental supplies for example. Now just as we did at the beginning of the video we also need to do some

resizing here of some of the columns just to make it a bit easier to see all of the data items that

we've got. So I'll just do that now quickly for the company name and also the sector and industry columns. Okay, now we get to move on to the processing and analytics stage.

Processing comes first and basically what you'll want to do is make sure that before

anything else is done you want to identify and fix any spurious data.

Now this stuff comes from video 28 in the course. But some of the things you'll want to check for are things like

incorrect earnings data, incorrect calculations, small earnings numbers leading to very high

magnitude earnings growth figures, which can then in turn skew sector calculations, and also

positive to negative EPS values and vice versa as you go through the fiscal years for each company.

Again, that can result in sort of misleading earnings growth numbers. So for the purposes of

this example, we're going to assume that all the EPS data we have here is correct and that we've

checked it. Therefore, as long as the calculation formulas we've used previously were accurate,

we should assume that all the calculation columns are accurate as well.

In terms of spurious data coming from changes in the signs of earnings or from small EPS

numbers, there isn't too much to worry about here either.

One thing we might want to keep an eye out for is the stocks that are showing particularly high or low earnings growth such as Align Technology or

Star Surgical Company. With Align Technology there doesn't seem to be too much wrong with the EPS

figures at first sight but potentially with Star Surgical the earnings growth in the current fiscal year is getting

skewed upwards by a particularly low EPS number. Now

whether or not this affects your analysis will come down to you doing a little bit extra work and

using some common sense. You'll probably want to find out whether the EPS numbers are particularly

strange or out of line in the context of the stock's previous numbers and if they are then it might be worth excluding them

from things like sector averages which actually we're going to move on to calculating just now.

So I'm going to run these in row 17. So in cell A17 I'm going to title the row sector averages

averages and then in cell M17 I'm going to calculate the average EG1 number for the sector.

The formula for that is just going to be equals average so we're using the Excel AVERAGE function

here and then in brackets selecting cells M2 to M15.

From there you can just copy across that formula to calculate the sector averages for eg2, pe1, pe2, peg1 and peg2

because they all use a very similar formula. We're just changing the references here.

So you can see that when I do that there are some formatting issues for the pe and peg numbers just

because when we copied across the formula we also copied across the percentage formatting from the EG1 or EARNINGS GROWTH1 column.

So to rectify that I'm just going to select cells O17 to R17 and format them as numbers

to two decimal places.

Okay, so running through these figures now our sector averages are 44.06% for EG1, 8.36%

for EG2, 34.57% for PE1, 30.73% for PE2, 1.58% for PEG1 and 2.55% for PEG2.

Now remember what I said earlier regarding keeping an eye on data that might be skewing

sector averages. If we take a look at this sector just by eye we can see that if anything the only

sort of potential spurious data that's having an outsized effect on sector averages is Star

Surgical Company. We can see this just by looking at things like its EG1 number and PE ratios which

are much much higher than the rest of the sector.

Now, as I said earlier, this could be due to the law of small numbers, meaning that the EPS numbers we see are relatively small,

which then causes very large calculation figures when those small numbers are used as denominators of equations, such as in the EG1 and PE ratios.

One thing we can do at this stage is just test the effect

of star surgical on the sector averages

to get a better idea of what's going on.

And probably the simplest way to do that,

with EG1 for example,

is just by deleting the company's numbers

and seeing how much the sector average changes.

And you can see here here when we clear the contents

of the EG1 value for star surgical that the sector average decreases pretty significantly

by around 7%. So it goes from 44% to 37%. The same can be seen in the PE ratios as well when

star surgical's PEs are removed from

the sector. The sector average for PE1 for example reduces from about 34 to 25 and for

PE2 from 30 to 23. Now I'm not saying for sure that you should

definitely be removing these numbers from the process. What I am saying is that you need to

look out for data like this and use common sense to tackle any issues that it might cause,

with of course the help from Anton in video 28 which you'll be going through later. If you think

these numbers cause unacceptable skew in our sector averages then you can modify the sector

averages by calculating them without Star Surgical for example, or potentially you could use a different measure of centrality for

the data for the sector data such as using the median function for example. But you can

only really do that with sectors that have a decent number of stocks within them. Modifying

the sector averages matters because remember they're used to help

identify sector outliers to then do further analysis on. So for the purposes of this example

I'm going to leave Star Surgical's data in but just take a mental note of the effect that it's

having as we go forward. Now we don't have an example of this in this sector but another thing to watch out for

is EPS values that change sign from year to year and what that kind of means for earnings growth as

well. Now as Anton will show you in video 28, one of the ways to tackle wild earnings growth

figures caused by EPS changing from positive to negative and vice versa is just to

cap the growth or loss at 100%. Now I'm not going to go into that here but you are going to learn about

that in video 28 and if you're looking at a sector with those issues all you would need to do is write

over the earnings growth numbers with whatever is relevant so plus or minus 100%. Okay so just before I go into looking

at some of the stocks here in more detail to identify outliers and various sort of long or

short profiles there is one more important thing to note at this stage which is actually pretty

relevant for this sector and that is the fact that a lot of these companies have quite different fiscal year

ends. Now this is pretty rare to be honest but you can see here in this example sector that we've got

fiscal years ending in September, December, June, October, March and April. The reason why we need

to kind of pay attention to that is that obviously it has an

impact on how we view the earnings and valuation numbers for each stock. So for context I'm filming

this in October 2021. That means that a stock like Amerisource Burgeon for example has just reported

their previous fiscal year which ended in September. Now that means their

current fiscal year numbers are effectively forward looking by about 11 months since their

current fiscal year ends in September 2022. Compare that to for example Align Technology whose

fiscal year ends in December, their current fiscal year only has around two to three months remaining

and so the weight that we should put on that current fiscal year compared to the next fiscal

year numbers is much less than for Amerisource, which is just something to bear in mind.

Remember also that when a line reports in January or February, a month or two

after their fiscal year end, their numbers are going to shift

from right to left in this sheet meaning assuming expectations are 100% accurate and remain constant

going forward until that point their current year numbers will become their previous year numbers

and their next year figures will become their current year values and so on. Okay so hopefully that's all clear.

I'm just trying to be kind of thorough for you guys at this point to kind of let you know what

you should be looking out for and the kind of thought processes that you should be going through

when looking at data like this and analysing it. Let's move on to identifying some outliers now then, starting with looking for potential

long ideas. To begin with, we want to find stocks where the market is paying a premium

for earnings, which essentially means that the market thinks the quality of the stock's

earnings is high. Doing that's pretty simple, all we need to do is filter the sector for

above average PE numbers. So to start with, let's add a filter to the data by selecting any column title and

going to data on the ribbon and then filter.

From there let's start with PE1 and select the filter and choose number filters and

then above average which will filter the sector to only show stocks with above average PE1 figures.

And you can see those stocks here.

So we've got Align, ConMed, Star and West Pharmaceutical.

We can then do the same thing with PE2 as well.

And you can see that by adding a PE2 filter in this case it doesn't actually make that much difference

but there will be of course definitely times when you're doing this sort of analysis and that will

narrow down the stocks that you're looking at further. So we've now got a good idea of the stocks

in a sector where the market is paying a premium for their earnings.

What we now want to do is look at earnings growth and ideally we would like to see above average

sequentially higher earnings growth figures across the current and next fiscal year for our long

outliers. But we can see here just by eyeballing the stocks that we have that that particular profile doesn't exist.

But we might have the next best thing which is above sector average earnings growth in both the

current and the next fiscal year. So we can add some more filters in the same way as we did before

but this time for earnings growth columns rather than the PE columns.

Well, I should say as well as the PE columns,

because we're going to keep those filters that we've already used thus far.

So I'm going to add an above average filter for both the EG1 and EG2 columns here,

and we'll see what happens to our results.

So as you can see here, that leaves us with three stocks. We've got Align, Conmed

and Star Surgical remaining. There's still a couple more things that we should be doing to make sure

that we end up identifying stocks are worth doing some extra work on at this stage. Firstly, remember

we're looking for potential long ideas here. And if we have a look at the

market cap column, we can see that Align technology has a market cap that is actually well above the

cutoff that we should have for long positions, which is about $10 billion. So we can rule that

one out straight away. And it's also worth looking at peg ratios to check that the numbers kind of

confirm that the stock's earnings are good

quality. So they should be kind of in line with what we see in the PE columns. Typically, this

isn't as important as looking at the PE ratios, but it's still a good sign to see PEG numbers

above one for our last two stocks, which are ConMed and Star Surgical. So like I said, that's just

another verification that the market deems that

the earnings for these companies are high quality. So that's probably as far as we need to go really

for identifying potential long idea outliers in this sector. Conmed and Star Surgical would both

now require extra work if we were kind of doing this for real both on the

quantitative and qualitative side of things before going any further and only if everything then

checks out could we possibly think about using them as trade ideas. One thing I do want to note

here with the process that we've used is, you know, at the beginning, I obviously chose to keep

Star Surgical in the analysis. It might be that actually if we did a little bit more digging and

more work and we looked at the company's past earnings, we could come to the conclusion that

actually the low EPS numbers are outliers for Star Surgical and it is skewing the sector data.

And therefore, we could exclude Star Surgical from the is skewing the sector data and therefore we could exclude Star Surgical

from the analysis and redo the stages that we went through just now. That in turn might then

result in an extra one or two potential stocks to conduct further analysis on and you know these are

the kind of decisions and thoughts that you guys are going to have to kind of go through and they're going to require,

you know, your own logic and common sense to do so. There isn't necessarily going to be a correct

answer. Again, all I'm kind of trying to do here when I'm talking about this stuff

is getting you thinking about the pros,

and analysis stages in the right way so that you can make your own informed

decisions. So before we finish here let's quickly take the filters off again and

just see if we can identify any other stocks that might be of interest in this

sector and to do that I'm just going to select each filter in turn and choose the option in each one to clear the filter for that column.

Okay so I'm just going to be eyeballing here we're not going to go into any level of detail like I

say because you've kind of got more things to cover in the video series but the processes are

going to be very similar to what we've just covered with long-only ideas. So like I said, I'm just eyeballing here, but I can see that, for example, both Laboratory Corporation of America and

McKesson Corporation have declining earnings growth profiles, which might make them interesting short

candidates as they could be ex-growth stocks. They also have below sector average P ratios and market caps above $20 billion.

So that fits some of our other requirements as well. You guys are going to learn more about

shorts in the subsequent videos, but yeah, those two could potentially be interesting.

Another one that could be interesting, although this is a little bit of a stretch is cardinal health. Its earnings growth

and valuation numbers aren't particularly far off what could be considered a potential turnaround

story or value trap. So a deeper dive into what's going on there could also yield some pretty exciting

conclusions as well. Now like I said I'm not going to talk about short or value traps and

turnarounds in any more detail really, because you guys are going to be covering those in subsequent

videos. But I did just want to kind of highlight and reference them here because ultimately,

the process that you're going to go through to identify them will be very similar to the process

that we use to identify longs. You know, meaning downloading

all of the US stock data, getting your industry data copied across into a new sheet, cleaning

all the data, and then using filters in the various columns to get to the results that you

want. The ones that you're looking for. So whether you're looking for long profiles,

short profiles, or potentially turnarounds or value traps, things like that.

Okay guys, that's it for this one. As I said, it's just a short tutorial to show you how to

practically implement the first stage of your microanalysis after you've built up a macro

picture. Remember, this really is just the first stage though, and once you've been through this,

you'd then need to go into a much deeper dive into quantitative analysis using other metrics like revenue growth and all the backward looking

balance sheet and income statement metrics as well then after all of that you also need to

understand the stock story and conduct a qualitative assessment as well and only

once you've done all of that can the idea actually become a trade. You've probably realised as I've

been through this section of the video that nothing is black and white when it comes to microanalysis,

even on the quantitative side. It's going to require sort of logic, due diligence and above all

common sense in order to get to sensible conclusions. So remember to stick to your ITPM

principles when you're doing this work.

It isn't possible for us to do all of the work for you. You're going to have to be able to deal with

various real world problems whenever you're dealing with data and analyzing stocks. Don't

get overwhelmed, just stick your head down and get on with it and you're going to reap the rewards for

it later. All right guys, that's it for this one and I'll see you later in the video series.