Okay, so welcome to the next part of the Professional Trading Masterclass video series.

We've moved away now from fundamentals in the trade idea generation process,

and now we're going to be focusing on timing.

So in the next two videos, we're going to be looking at here in this video, video 36, technical analysis.

So chart patterns and pattern formation and recognition.

And in the next video, we're going to be looking at price action.

to be looking at price action. Now by way of a reminder, let's just remind ourselves here of our time horizon and our volatility profile for long short

portfolio management. We are operating in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, therefore

when we enter positions we are looking to make money within that time horizon.

We sit in the volatility sweet spot where we adhere to the best disciplines of both trading and investing.

So we sit between those two disciplines.

Of course, we can't stick to an exact rule book for every single trade.

We saw in past examples in the PTM video series that sometimes we're going to be trading out of positions well within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And sometimes it's going to be slightly longer than 60 days.

longer than 60 days. So yes, sometimes we will go over the 60-day time horizon because catalysts may not have occurred yet, but we always have to be intellectually honest with ourselves and our

strategy. We know that when we go over 60 days, the clock is ticking on a trade. And we have this gray area between 60 and 120 days

where every day that goes by,

the trade is becoming more and more of an investment.

So yes, in an ideal trade, we want to be in on day one

and we want to be out of the trade between 20 and 60 days.

But sometimes we will have to to or we will choose to

hold positions slightly over 60 days but not too long and this is the main reason why we bring into

our overall trade idea generation process tools that are going to help us optimize our timing.

In financial markets that are, in terms of volatility, normal, so when volatility is at

normal levels, so if we think about the S&P 500, we're going to be able to do that.

volatility index. When the VIX is at historically normal levels, which would be around the mid to

high teens, what we tend to find is that anything below 20 days, so short-volatile, so both risk and opportunity over a 1 to 20-day time horizon

is very small. And not only that, but price movements are very unpredictable. Why? Because in the very short term, so intraday and even on a daily basis over one week, two weeks, three weeks, unless something fundamentally is changing, price movements in the short term are essentially random. So if we're trading in those conditions, we are likely to be trading,

very likely to be trading in conditions of unpredictable noise.

Now, on the flip side, if we look at an investor time horizon,

so beyond 120 days and even further, out to one year, three years, five years. What's going to be the biggest

predictor of price? Well, it's very likely, most likely to be fundamentals. So we as long-short

portfolio managers sit in between the two. We are not strictly short-term. We are not strictly long-term. We are medium-term portfolio managers. We sit in the volatility sweet spot and we seek fundamental momentum, but we also want to be correct within a certain time horizon, which requires us to have catalysts and various tools to help us time our trades well.

time our trades well. So if you recall the pro-trader systematic process for long-short portfolio management over our time horizon 20 to 60 days, our most important work is our

quantitative and qualitative processes, all rooted in fundamentals in determining fundamental tailwind.

in fundamentals in determining fundamental tailwind.

This makes up the vast majority of what we do, as you've seen, as evidenced by the PTM video series.

And then we want to have catalysts and we're looking to time our trades around the fundamentals and the catalysts

in the specific situation.

So when it comes to these tools that help us time our trades better,

I guess the big question is, where do we actually use technical analysis?

How do we actually use it to get the most out of it?

So before we actually look at the details of the technical analysis

and price action tools that we use.

Let's have a little chat about charts and price action first and where it actually fits in.

And it's very, very important that we do this before we move on to the tools themselves.

move on to the tools themselves.

Because in trading, especially with retail traders, there is a big misconception as to the uses of technical analysis

and price action and where it actually fits in at the professional level.

So in a 20 to 60-day long-short portfolio management framework, so our systematic framework as professional traders,

our technical analysis and price action indicators do have a place in that process.

However, it is in the vast minority of what we do as part of the trade idea generation process.

However, it would be obviously totally irresponsible for us to completely dismiss timing.

We obviously must attempt to time our trades better and become good at that over time. So whether we're choosing to structure a trade as a stock position, an options trade, or even a mixture of both stock and options,

we need to get a sense of whether we're timing our position well, poorly, or benignly.

or benignly. When it comes to stock charts, ideally what we want to see from a chart is that the patterns, the technical analysis patterns in the chart and the price action of the stock over the medium term generally supports our fundamental thesis. Now, just by way of definitions, as we go through this,

it's just important to understand the difference between technical analysis and price action

when we refer to it here over this video and the next video.

Technical analysis is the study of pattern recognition and formations in price.

And price action is the study of price momentum.

So as we're going through things in this video and the next video, just remember those

definitions.

And this is why we've split here in the PTM video series, when it comes to our timing disciplines, we've split it into two videos, one for technical analysis and one for price action.

Now, back to this chat we're having, this little chat we're having about technical analysis or charts, pattern recognition, and price action.

In professional trader circles, it is generally seen as absolutely absurd by us

that retail traders get their trade ideas from charts.

Professional traders use technical analysis as a tool only to get a sense of whether

their timing is looking good or not. Now, in our experience, it's not just a lack of education

or the retail misconception of where technical analysis and price action fits in to a trade idea generation

process. It's not just a lack of education. One of the main reasons why retail traders put so much

emphasis on it as a tool for generating ideas is because retail are essentially short on time.

ideas is because retail are essentially short on time. The vast, vast majority of retail traders out there in the world either have a full or part-time job, or they're running businesses,

they have family commitments, and on top of that, hobbies and interests in their downtime.

Trading as a pursuit comes very, very low on the priority list and what happens is is that this

obviously leaves a very short amount of time each week to generate high quality trade ideas in the

same way that professional traders do on top of that retail traders do also place a lot of emphasis on technical analysis because it's just really

easy to understand. Cognitively, it's nicer to look at a picture than to actually do the work

of mining through tons of data in order to get an edge. And these things, when you combine them

together, are essentially the main weaknesses of retail traders.

And bad actors who know these weaknesses are more than happy to provide shortcuts and hacks that lead people on a road to nowhere.

So when it comes to technical analysis and price action indicators, these shortcuts and hacks,

you've probably heard them all before,

but they go something like this.

If you would have bought here

and sold here while they're pointing

at a chart, you would have

made money. And then

they'll point to past prices

on areas of the chart and say here and here and here, etc., etc.

Well, any idiot in the world can look at a picture of the past price of a stock on a chart

and look for a move that was significant and just say the following.

You could have bought something here and sold something there.

The problem is, is it's all in the past and doesn't necessarily help us if we're just using it in

isolation or predicting the future. So when it comes to price and charts, pictures are easier for people to understand and to cognitively process.

But, and this is a very big but, making a connection from seeing a picture of what happened in the past to then assuming it will happen again in the future over and over again is just a fool's game.

A past price chart is simply a photograph of past fundamentals.

And because of this, this is sometimes an argument used

as what they refer to as a strong argument by technical analysts.

They will often say, well, if the past price chart is representative of all fundamentals,

then the future price chart will be.

So why not just trade the chart if it tells us the fundamentals?

Well, the answer to that is pretty damn simple.

It's not a process that is repeatable.

Why? Because you will have no idea why you are ever right or wrong on a trade.

And what will happen is, in the future, you will justify both losses and gains

by stating that the chart just did something, so I was right or wrong.

The reason why you were right or wrong is not because the chart just did something.

It's because something has changed fundamentally.

The forward-looking fundamentals changed,

or specifically, the expectations of the market changed based on fundamentals.

So if you recall from earlier in the PTM video series, if you remember analyst discounted cash

flow models that are forward-looking and they work out the NPV, the net present value per share for an equity based on all future expectations of cash flows from the company.

Well, the price you see on the screen is the market, and that is what the market is doing.

The market is looking forwards, not backwards.

And technical analysts use past price to determine their trading positions.

And you can ask any professional level quantitative trader who builds short-term programs and algorithms to take advantage of short-term price movements.

It's literally their job to do that.

that. They do not use patterns and they do not use technical analysis to get consistent profits out of the short term.

Why? Because when they've modeled it and done all the back testing in the short term, there are no predictable technical analysis patterns that generate consistently profitable outcomes for traders.

Any quantitative trader at the professional level will tell you categorically that short-term price movements are random and it's all just noise.

And if you recall, if you've done the IPLT video series,

when we looked at day trading and we literally showed 50-50 odds

of making money. Well, what is that? That is randomness. No amount of chart analysis,

no amount of pattern recognition, or technical analysis, or price action indicators in short-term timeframes can detract from the randomness in price.

No amount of it will add any value whatsoever.

Now, as we mentioned earlier on the flip side to that, in the long term, it's fundamentals that move price over an investor time horizon.

And as long-short portfolio managers, we sit in between the two.

We are medium term.

So this is where technical analysis as a discipline fits in.

We get the most out of this discipline by using it over medium-term timeframes.

And we certainly don't use technical analysis tools to generate trade ideas.

We use technical analysis to time our fundamental ideas, which turns them into trades.

So a fundamental thesis, which is defined with no time horizon as an

investment, turns into a trade if we have catalysts and good timing within the 20 to 60 day time

horizon. As a trader, whether it's on the retail side, the professional side, it just doesn't matter.

If the only way that you get your trade ideas in stocks is from utilizing technical analysis,

you are literally just guessing over and over again.

And any player in the financial market,

whose strategy is based only on guesses, will always get found out in the stock market

and will always lose money in the long run.

Think about retail trader statistics across financial markets.

Have you ever wondered why the statistics of success and failure of retail traders

in financial markets never actually improve.

Well, it's because of things like this.

So putting a massive overemphasis on one part of a trade idea generation process

because it's just easy to understand it's easy to process cognitively,

and on the surface, it seems simple to make money from.

And because in the short term, it's just noise,

and using it in isolation to generate trade ideas

means you have absolutely no idea why you're in a position,

what ends up happening. Well, when why you're in a position, what ends up happening.

Well, when you're right on a position, you applaud yourself for being able to spot a pattern in the chart.

And when you're wrong, what do you do? You blame the chart.

The reality is, is that over many trades, over a long period of time, it just never works. And anyone that perpetuates

this approach is 100% a charlatan. And unfortunately, there's a lot of them out there.

And I can hear some of you now, you know, raising this question, but what about all those guys

on social media who only use charts?

Well, the answer to that question is pretty straightforward.

They're either outright morons or they know exactly what they're doing.

They are conscious of what they're doing.

And they know that they're selling you total crap to make a buck. And whether they're outright morons or they're conscious of it

and they know exactly what they're doing,

either way, they are charlatans.

They themselves are operating at the level of unconscious incompetence.

Your job here, when you're pursuing your education,

is to climb the competency hierarchy. Never slip back into this bad habit of not doing the

fundamental work and looking into the tea leaves for the shortcuts. You need to

understand the backdrop here and you need to understand the motivations of

other people in financial markets and understand your own motivations. If you

want to get to the standard and climb the competency hierarchy, get to the

standard of the professional trader level.

Just looking at technical analysis is never going to get you there.

It won't even get you out of the level of unconscious incompetence.

And this is why it's necessary at this stage to have this little chat about technical analysis.

In an overall professional level trade idea generation process,

technical analysis and price action indicators make

up less than 10% of our work.

Our fundamental work makes up around 90%.

As professional traders, we don't even do any analytics when it comes to technical analysis

from a chart until we've done the fundamental work.

Now, up to this point in the PTM video series, we've only eyeballed charts to see if there were big price moves in the past

when we were actually assessing a stock's potential for catalysts.

when we were actually assessing a stock's potential for catalysts.

By the time we actually get to the stage of technical analysis,

we have a much, much clearer picture of what's really going on behind the scenes in the stock.

We've got a much clearer picture of what's going on behind the chart, behind the picture, on the screen. So we know what's going on fundamentally and with past catalysts that were meaningful.

If something then goes right or wrong with our position, we generally know exactly why,

and it goes in our database.

It goes in our experience database that we build up over many years.

And this basically means that over a long period of time,

the process just gets better and better and better over time.

It becomes more refined because the process is compounding over many trades

and leans more and more towards higher and more consistent returns.

So whatever you do, guys, don't confuse technical analysis with a tool that actually generates trade

ideas. It just simply doesn't. But listen, at the same time, it's not a useless tool, and it does have its place in an overall systematic

process. Technical analysis is like anything else. It's only useless if it's the only thing you use.

To be an effective, long-short portfolio manager over the medium term, The majority of our trade idea generation process

must be rooted in fundamentals.

So fundamental processes, quantitative and qualitative work.

And then what separates a trade idea from an investment idea

is catalysts and timing. So we add in catalysts, meaningful catalysts that are going to occur

in the 20 to 60 day time horizon. And we add in technical analysis and price action indicators.

And then of course, all of this information taken together will define or determine our optimal trade structure.

So guys, that was our little chat about technical analysis

or specifically where to use technical analysis

and how to think about it.

It's very important to understand where this fits in,

especially as a retail trader.

Now, let's get a bit more specific and let's have a look at some big mistakes

when it comes to technical analysis.

And this is especially important, again, for retail traders to understand

because really most of you taking the PTM video series,

this will be the first time, your first experience of ever seeing

a pro-trader systematic process.

And how you actually marry up your fundamentals and your technical tools

is very important because there's kind of a best practices,

best behaviors path that we need to go down.

So when we just had our little chat about where technical analysis fits in to an overall trade idea generation process,

we covered, obviously, getting a trade idea solely from a chart.

obviously getting a trade idea solely from a chart. But just as bad is then looking at the fundamentals to then justify why you've got the position after you've made the decision from the

chart. So imagine that situation for a moment where the first thing you do is you go straight to a

chart, you pull it up, you determine that because of the chart, you're going to go long this particular stock.

And then when it starts moving around, you then do the fundamental work afterwards

and then look for reasons why you should be long in the fundamentals.

That is obviously completely unacceptable, completely intellectually dishonest.

And through confirmation bias, you're likely to justify any position to yourself

by looking for fundamentals that suit your own internal narrative

that you've created by just looking at a chart.

That's you basically turning the process

upside down and engaging in a

bad behaviors and this is

not just something that retail traders are guilty of

all the time many professional traders do this as well

And when other professional traders spot them doing it, they lose a lot of credibility by doing it.

And other professional traders will actually call them out on it.

So never engage in that behavior.

Never pull up a chart.

Get a trade idea from the chart going long or short.

And then after you've got the position on, start looking at the fundamentals to justify

your position. You just haven't done any work. This is totally lazy and you're going to get found out.

Next up, think of a situation where you actually go short of a stock that you're

fundamentally bullish on. So you've done all of your work fundamentally

and you've now got a fundamental predisposition

where you believe that the tailwind in the stock

is fundamentally bullish.

But then because you pull up the chart

and the technical pattern on the screen

just looks bearish in the short to medium term.

And then you go short that stock. That is a sackable offense at any investment bank or hedge fund.

And then think of the flip side where you go long a stock that you're actually fundamentally bearish

on. So you've done all your fundamental work

and you believe that the stock is actually going to go down fundamentally. And then you go long

because you pulled up the chart and the technical pattern in the short to medium term

on the screen looks bullish. This again is a suckable offense. And in this situation, it actually doesn't even matter

if you make or lose money.

Why? Because you are literally advertising

that you have no conviction in your ideas

and that your process is chaotic, incongruent, and lazy.

is chaotic, incongruent, and lazy.

So these are big mistakes that you need to avoid at all times.

Do not fall in to these bad habits.

Just imagine for a moment on the professional side of the industry,

imagine two things. Firstly, professional traders at hedge funds and investment banks only using technical analysis and price action indicators to generate trade ideas.

Just imagine that for a moment. Do you honestly think at a $5 billion hedge fund, for example, so a hedge fund that has $5 billion of assets under management, they have teams of people, teams of technical analysts telling them when to buy and sell stocks. And they are actually the guys generating the trade ideas. And then they go and put on $250 million.

million dollar positions because a line crossed another line on a chart. Of course not. It doesn't

even exist. No one on the professional side of the industry is generating a trade idea using a chart

and then putting on a position. And not just that, no one on the professional side is pulling up a chart, deciding whether to go long or short of a stock or an asset,

then putting the position on,

and then looking for fundamentals to justify

why they've got the position on afterwards.

Of course, none of this in reality happens.

This is a very, very big mistake.

And additionally, no one on the professional side of the industry is doing their fundamental work to decide on a position, long or short, and then after they've got their fundamental predisposition, no professional trader is then allowing themselves to get swayed by the

chart and then doing the opposite to their fundamental view. So those guys called professional traders

that are at the top of the competency hierarchy, at unconscious competence. None of them are engaging in these behaviors.

So just make sure that you don't too.

These are big mistakes.

Before you even consider charts or technical analysis,

so your timing phase of your trade idea,

you will already have a fundamental predisposition in place. So you'll either be

bullish or bearish fundamentally of a stock. Do not let the chart of past price change your mind.

When we get to this stage, when we're analyzing timing using technicals and price action,

they tell us what we probably shouldn't be doing

just as much as what we probably should be doing.

So to engage in better behaviors and avoid all of these classic mistakes,

try to think of it like a traffic light system.

So in your mind, whenever you pull up a chart, when you come to this stage,

think of it as a technical analysis and price action indicator traffic light system.

So let's start at the top.

Imagine you're in a situation where you've done all of your fundamental work and you genuinely think that you have a fundamental tailwind.

So you like your idea fundamentally.

You really genuinely believe that fundamentally you've got the wind in your sails, you've got the wind in your sails.

whether that's a long idea or a short idea.

But when you get to the timing stage,

even if you've got the fundamentals in place

and you've got some identifiable, meaningful catalysts,

when you pull up the chart and you look at the price action,

you realize that it's probably not good timing.

This is going to be a red in the TA and PA traffic light system.

Your fundamental idea may actually be good.

You might have some catalysts in place that are potentially meaningful

over the next 20 to 60 days.

place that are potentially meaningful over the next 20 to 60 days. But the technical analysis and price action indicators that you're looking at suggests that the timing is off. So for example,

the short-term trend might be against you. In this situation, you're probably better off not doing the trade. So do not trade

in that situation. What you're most likely to be doing here is sticking this idea on what we call

the watch list. And we'll talk about watch lists in a bit more detail later in this video. But

essentially, you're going to stick it on a

watch list and you're going to sit back, you're going to not trade, and you're just going to wait

till the timing gets a little bit better, or even a lot better. Essentially what you're trying to do

in this situation is just add value to your execution. So adding value to a solid, good, fundamental idea with catalysts

on entry into that position.

Now, next up is the situation on the traffic light system

where we have an amber.

So you've done all your fundamental work.

You pull up the chart, and it looks like that the fundamentals you've

identified and the catalyst, the meaningful catalyst, look like they're starting to play

out in the chart and in the price action. So it looks like the timing might be okay.

It might not be really obvious that the fundamentals are now playing out in the price,

but when you look at the chart and look at the price action indicators, it looks like it's

starting to wind up. So, for example, the trend is starting to turn and it may continue in the future.

Now, in this situation, you need to use quite a bit of discretion.

So this is a situation where you would consider trading. And you've got various options here.

You can take a half position or even you can take a

full position with good risk management. And even just taking a half position in this situation

is risk management in itself. You are preemptively seeking to add value to the execution on entry,

but at the same time, you're acknowledging the technicals and the price action and taking some sort of position, perhaps a half position,

so you don't actually miss it. So with an amber, you can definitely consider trading,

having a half position or a portion of your intended full position or even a full position

with good preemptive risk management in place.

But also in this situation, if you wanted to be very, very careful, very conservative, you may decide again not to trade and wait for a little bit and just stick the idea on the watch list and try to get more favorable prices.

Now, what about a green light on a trade idea?

Well, that one's fairly straightforward. So imagine you've done all of your fundamental work.

You've got your meaningful catalysts in place. You pull up the chart. You do your technical analysis.

You do your work on price action indicators, and everything looks lined up very well.

So it looks like your TA and PA agrees in terms of good timing for your fundamental idea.

So the TA and PA suggests that the timing is definitely in your favor.

So for example, we have a continuation of trend

or an aggressive breakout or breakdown of the price.

In this situation, you're very likely to trade.

This is a green light and you're going to be committing capital to the position

and very likely you're going to go very close

or have a full position size on.

And just to clarify, in the previous example with Amber, if you put on a half position and then in

the future it became a green light, that's when you would put on the other half of the position.

But do bear in mind, guys, you know, this is a preemptive risk management and there

is no hard and fast rule book in what to do in every situation. It's all situational

and you have to do all of your work, both fundamentally on catalysts and on timing, and you have to use discretion, or very obviously. This isn't

a one-size-fits-all rulebook scenario. You're going to have to use discretion, but there

is a logical and sensible.

approach here where you just express some caution at the timing stage when you're doing your

technical analysis and when you're doing your price action analysis and when you're marrying this

work up with your fundamental work. The work on the TA and PA is either going to agree, disagree,

the TA and PA is either going to agree, disagree, or somewhat agree with your fundamental work.

You have to come to that determination and you have to take the right action or engage in a logical and sensible behavior to express that reality when you're committing capital.

So whenever we're pulling up charts in the PTM video series from now on,

and even if you go back earlier in the video series to re-watch videos,

try to get into the habit when you pull up charts

of always thinking of the TA and PA traffic light system

and how the timing is married up to the fundamentals

and whether your technical analysis and price action work

disagrees, agrees, or somewhat agrees with your fundamental analysis.

If you get into that habit over many trades, over a long period of time, with some experience, you'll become way better, much better at committing the right levels of capital at the right time.

Now, we're going to get into the details now of technical analysis.

now of technical analysis. We're going to start looking at chart patterns in this video.

And in the next video, we will be looking at price action indicators. But here first, we're going to be looking at chart patterns. We'll be looking at the most common ones and how you

actually use them in your trading process. Okay, so the first thing we're

going to discuss and we're going to get this out of the way quite quickly, we're

going to talk about candlesticks and some basic candlestick formations for

open, high and low closed data. And very typically we'll be looking at daily data.

And what you're looking at here on the left and the right are two

representations of daily open high and low close data. So starting on the left hand side,

we have a candle with a black body. And that is formed when the opening price is higher than the closing

price. And this is considered to

be a bearish signal.

And we also have depicted

on there, obviously, the high

price and the low price.

And we have two parts to the candle.

We have the body

and the wick. The body is formed by the open price and the closing price, and the wick is formed by

the high price and the low price. On the right-hand side, we have a white-bodied candle, and this is

formed when the closing price is higher than the opening price, and this is considered a bullish signal.

Again, the candle is formed by two parts, the body and the wick.

The body is formed by the open and close price and the wick by the high and low price.

And really when we're looking at daily data and we're looking at periods of 20 to 60 days,

which is our time horizon, you genuinely really do not need to go

very deep into understanding candlesticks. If you think about charts, when we're thinking about our

time horizon of 20 to 60 days, and we're looking at daily data, we're not just going to look at periods of 20 to 60 days we're going to

look at 20 to 60 day time horizons in the context of a much bigger chart so yes

you can go into a lot of detail and in most areas of technical analysis this is

true you can go into a hell of a lot of detail about candlesticks. So for example,

you can look at doji formations or candlesticks, dragonfly dojis, long-legged dojis,

gravestone dojis, hammers, hanging man, inverted hammers, shooting stars, long upper shadows, long lower shadows,

shaven heads, shaven bottoms.

The list is endless, guys.

The point is quite simple.

In a bigger picture chart, because we are medium-term traders,

we do not need to go into significant amounts of detail,

and certainly we don't really need to go into any detail beyond understanding the basics for candlesticks.

Now, this is the standard definition and description of how candlesticks are formed,

but it also always depends on how your charting software is set up.

So, for example, the charting software that we're using here, we've got the reverse situation.

So the body of a bearish candle is actually filled in.

So the body of a bearish candle where the close is lower than the open on my software is actually filled in, so it's opaque. And for a bullish candle where the close is higher than the open in my software is actually filled in.

it's set up to be transparent.

So just bear this in mind as we go through a lot of our examples here.

Bullish candles are transparent body and bearish candles are the filled in body or opaque.

Make sure when you're looking at your own charting software that you look at this properly,

look into it properly and get the detail correct.

Now, moving forward, what we're going to cover here is a whole bunch of technical analysis patterns.

So, these taken together form our TA, our technical analysis checklist.

our technical analysis checklist.

So when you're going through your timing appraisal,

you can refer to this checklist and appraise the chart that you're looking at

by referring to the checklist

and seeing if any of the TA patterns

that are covered here are expressed in the chart

that you're looking at and understand what the

most likely action is going to be in terms of your timing for your positioning. Now, of course,

this list is not exhaustive. You can add to this list if you really want to. However,

this list if you really want to. However, it really is key to understand that technical analysis and charting is literally an endless rabbit hole. In terms of technical analysis and price action,

really all you have to do at the timing appraisal stage is to get the big things, get the most

important things right. There's very obviously a law of diminishing marginal utility

to going too deep into technical analysis and price action

in terms of what value it's going to add

to your bottom line in your trading account.

Over the 20 to 60 day time horizon, utilizing daily data,

you just have to get the most important things, the big picture, right in terms of your timing.

So let's start with trending stocks.

This is all very, very straightforward stuff.

So we're looking here at an upward trending stock.

We're looking at ODFL, Old Dominion Freight Line.

How do you interpret this?

Well, very simple.

The stock is trending upwards and it's bullish.

Now, when we look through all of these patterns,

we're going to be looking at all of these patterns through both a long lens and a short

lens.

So imagine if you have your fundamental predisposition of, for example, bullish.

You have your catalysts in place.

You think over the next 20 to 60 days, this stock is going to be a good one.

going to continue trending up or even better break to the upside through the trend and have

an even more bullish move in the price. So you would arrive here, you would look at this in

terms of timing and you would first of all establish that there is an uptrend and that

this is a good thing.

The technical analysis pattern agrees with your fundamental analysis.

However, how you execute now is down to discretion.

So it can be situational to what is happening in the stock at the time,

your fundamental analysis that you've done, and also the catalysts

that are on the horizon. So again, there's no rule book here, guys. There's not a book that you can

read that gives you the rules of exactly how you execute according to technical analysis timing.

So imagine you were looking at this stock and you are thinking of buying $10,000 worth of stock.

Well, you can see it's traveling or trading towards the top of this range.

And you have various choices here.

You can either be high conviction and put the whole position on thinking it's going to break to the upside even more

aggressively. You can be slightly more conservative. You can, for example, buy half a position size.

Or you can be brave and you can sit back and wait for a few days and try to get this stock at a

lower price towards the lower end of the upward trend.

The point here is simple, guys. Think about it in the context of the traffic light system.

You arrive here from your timing, from your timing appraisal, you're pulling up the chart

and you're trying to determine whether this is a green light given your fundamental predisposition. And this is a green light for sure. An upward trending

stock married up with a fundamental predisposition of bullish is a green light. How you then execute is situational and down to your discretion.

Now let's think about this from a short perspective.

As much as this is a green light for a fundamental predisposition of bullish,

from a short perspective, looking at this through the lens of a fundamentally bearish predisposition,

this would actually be a red light.

What you would much rather see here for you to get a short position on

is that the stock is trading through the bearish

bottom end of the range of the trend. Why? Because it means it's broken the trend. The stock price

in that situation has broken the upward trend and it's broken it to the downside. So in all likelihood,

you would be much better off just sitting back and waiting for the price to confirm that it wants to break the trend to the downside.

In that situation, you'd have your fundamental predisposition of bearish,

and the technicals are confirming your fundamental predisposition.

Now, again, there is no hard and fast rule book here, guys.

Now, again, there is no hard and fast rule book here, guys.

We're not saying here that in all situations,

there's actions that you need to take.

You could be a little bit brave here. So let's say you have a fundamental predisposition of bearish

and you're at the top.

The price is at the top of the upward range.

you're at the top, the price is at the top of the upward range.

It would be a bit careless to go and put on a full position size.

So let's say your full position size is $10,000.

It would probably be the wrong thing to do and quite irresponsible to do that. But you could potentially go and put a small amount of the short on. So let's say two

and a half or $3,000 of the short, and then just sit back and wait. Again, there's no absolute hard

and fast rule book. You could put, say, the two and a half or $3,000 short on, and then when it breaks to the downside, get up to your

full position size. And in that case, you would actually have a higher average price than the

first scenario than if you shorted it on the break to the downside. But at the same time,

you are taking a bit of risk here even though it's a small negligible

position that the stock just continues on the uptrend and you're just wrong. So

again it's down to discretion and probabilistic scenarios. But generally

speaking in the bigger picture a trending stock upwards for a fundamental

predisposition of bullish is going to be a green light upwards for a fundamental predisposition of bullish is going to be a

green light and for a fundamental predisposition of bearish in the bigger picture it's going to be a

warning sign it's going to be a red light so all pretty basic stuff guys when we look at trending

stocks and if we look at a downward

trending stock you would obviously

expect the opposite

disciplines to hold true.

So this is quite an

entertaining chart here. This is

Tesla scrolled back

to 20

So you can see here on the chart that Tesla at the end of 2018 was around $70, $75, and it went down to $35 to $40 around that range.

downward trend to the upside.

And at the time of recording, 2021,

this stock, Tesla, was $580.

So this is a good example whereby if you came into this situation where you pulled up the chart

and it just broken the downward trend to the upside and you were fundamentally bearish,

this would have been a big warning sign.

This would have been a big flashing red light.

And if you were bullish, it would have been a big flashing green light.

But if we go back and we think about the downward sloping trending channel,

if you'd have, let's say, come into this in March 2019,

and you had a fundamental predisposition that's bullish,

that would have been a warning sign at that time for the technical timing.

And if you'd have come in bearish, that would have been actually a green light at that time.

And again, in terms of executions and how you would go about executing your position size,

that would just be down to the situation again at the time catalyst

you see on the horizon.

And it really is discretionary.

There's no rule book in terms of exactly what you have to do for your executions when certain

things happen in the technicals of a stock.

Because we're a 20 to 60 day time horizon, we don't have to be surgically precise

in everything we do. We just have to stick to a checklist of technical patterns and stick

to some loosely held best practices. But definitely in this situation, a downward trending stock, if you come in

with a fundamentally bullish predisposition and you're coming into it when there's a very

defined downtrend, it's going to be a red light. And if you come into it with a fundamentally bearish predisposition,

it's very likely that it's going to be a green light.

If you come into a situation where you've got a downward trending stock,

you have a fundamentally bullish predisposition, and the price has broken to the upside, the downward trend.

This is a bullish signal, and it's going to be a green light.

If you're fundamentally bearish, that is going to be a red light.

And yes, the opposite would be true there if you had an upward trending stock like in the previous example and the price broke to the downside.

In both cases, what's most likely to happen is you're going to sit back, put the stock on the watch list, put it down to poor timing, sit back and wait for better entries, or even no entry at all.

Because Tesla would be a classic example of that, where it was very easy to be fundamentally

bearish in that stock.

But so many times, people will have pulled up, people who had a fundamental bearish predisposition.

They will have pulled up the stock,

and they would have seen in the technical patterns and price action

that would not have agreed with their fundamental bearish predisposition.

And instead of listening to that and realizing that the TA doesn't marry up with

their fundamental predisposition, a lot of traders, long-short portfolio managers,

got very dogmatic in their fundamental predisposition, didn't listen to the message of aggressive breakouts in the stock.

And they went in and they were fighting the market all the way up.

And you can see where the price is now at the top of the screen at the time of recording, $580.

So being dogmatic in your fundamental predisposition and not listening to the technicals can be actually very detrimental to your returns, especially on shorts, of course.

Look at the Tesla example. You can get completely wiped out when you have a move like that in one or two years and you keep going

in and shorting a stock. There's obviously always a time and moment where you have to just admit that

your timing is off and then there's also a time and a moment when you just have to admit that your fundamental predisposition is just wrong. In this example with Tesla, when the stock broke the downward sloping trend to the upside, guys who had a fundamental predisposition of bearish

who were smart enough not to be too dogmatic and listen to their timing appraisal

probably would not have shorted the stock.

This would then have led to more objectivity in the future

when the stock just carried on going up,

and maybe they would have asked themselves the question,

maybe my entire thesis here, my entire fundamental predisposition of bearish is just wrong.

And unlike the guy who came in with a fundamental predisposition of bearish and then was very dogmatic and took the approach where they just ignored the technicals and said technicals don't matter.

This stock is going to zero etc the guy who took note of the technicals

and had the discipline didn't blow up

because the guy who came in with a fundamental predisposition of bearish

and ignored the technicals and got very dogmatic, ended up getting emotionally

attached to the position, ended up continuously fighting the market all the way up, shorting

more and more and more all the way up, and then eventually just blows up.

Essentially, what would have happened there is that they would end up with an investment

time horizon position, but for a short position.

The good news is for 20 to 60 day time horizon long short portfolio managers, that would just never happen to us.

Why? Because if we're wrong in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, we just move on.

to 60 day time horizon, we just move on. So imagine yourself pulling up the chart in the downward channel in the 20 to 60 day time horizon. In the bigger picture here, guys, a fundamentally

bullish predisposition, it's going to be a red light. For a fundamentally bearish predisposition,

bearish predisposition, it's going to be a green light.

And then we've discussed the breakout to the upside for a fundamentally bullish predisposition.

That is going to be a green light

and fundamentally bearish a red light.

So trending stocks overall, guys,

trending upwards or trending downwards,

it's all pretty straightforward stuff.

You just obviously need to use a bit of a discretion here

and take messages from the chart in terms of how optimal your timing is.

Remember earlier, we mentioned that the discipline of technical analysis in terms of our context, the long-short portfolio manager, tells you as much about what not to do as what to do. It's very interesting.

easy when you've done all of your fundamental work to think to yourself that you've got an amazing

long or short idea. In fact, that would be totally natural to think that because you're so invested

in the idea mentally and emotionally at that stage if you're not an experienced trader, that you can even start seeing things in the charts that you want to see.

So you need to be totally objective here.

Put the brakes on if you need to.

There's no shame and no harm in sitting back

and waiting for technicals to confirm your fundamental view.

But overall, as we're going through these patterns,

we've started with trending stocks.

Trending stocks are all pretty straightforward.

What's a little bit more complicated

is when you get to things like ranging stocks.

So here we have a stock on the screen,

Bill Holdings, Bill.com.

And we've pulled up the stock here in March and April 2021.

And what matters here in ranging stocks is charting both support and resistance levels. So we can see here on this chart,

if we look at the first resistance level,

we can see with the red line,

we've charted the first resistance level

at the level where Bill Holdings has traded twice

in the high $160 and failed to go higher.

And then the big resistance level going back to February

is around or just above $190.

And there's a few what we would call minor resistance levels

that we've charted in between. On the support side, we've charted support number one and support number two.

Support number one as $140 and support number two just above $130.

So if you look at where the stock is traded, it's traded at a support level of around this small range,

this minor range of $140 to $130 and found support around that level several times.

Now, the reason why ranging stocks are a little bit tricky is because there's no actual defined medium-term trend.

So when you think about it in terms of our time horizon,

for the 20 to 60 days,

we are fundamental long-short portfolio managers.

What we are seeking is...

a directional bet. And not only that, but a directional bet that's going to pay us a high

absolute return. So we need a defined move. So when we come into a stock like this, where

we see it's ranging, our 20 to 60 day time horizon may be in question. Something fundamental has to change for this stock to either

break out to the upside from the range or break down to the downside from this range. And it has

to happen within the 20- to 60-day time horizon. Now, if you've come into this situation with a, for example, a fundamental predisposition of bullish.

And you've identified a number of catalysts, positive catalysts that you think are going

to occur in the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

And you think there's a very good chance that with the technical setup as it is right now you

think that the stock has a very good chance of breaking to the upside and

breaking resistance one so the red line and challenging resistance to the purple

line so the major resistance and not that, but even going higher than that within the time horizon.

So let's assume that we've got this predisposition.

The question here is, if we look at the chart,

are we actually timing this well?

Do we have a red light, a green light, or perhaps an amber? Well, when we've

drawn our support and resistance, in this case, at the moment, the stock is trading at

around $145, $146. It's questionable whether you would want to miss it if it's a very high

conviction. So yes, in an ideal world, we would love to miss it if it's a very high conviction.

So yes, in an ideal world, we would love to try and buy it around support.

So we would love to try and buy it perhaps $10 lower.

But there's a problem with that in that you might actually miss the situation. So in this instance, you would probably think that this situation,

because it's not perfectly sitting on support,

you would probably mark this down as an amber situation.

What you can do here is buy a one-third size position or a half size position.

And what you can do is if it does trade back down to support and you're underwater a little bit, you can actually increase your position size at support and lower your position.

your average price. Additionally, if you do buy, let's say, a half position size at current

market levels and the stock does go towards resistance and then breaks resistance to the

upside, well, you can always add the other half on a breakout. So this here at this level

in a context of a ranging stock and a fundamental predisposition of bullish,

you would probably, most likely, define this as an amber situation,

and you would put something on so you don't miss it,

and try to improve your execution and trade the stock as it trades.

Now, what would happen if you pull up this chart, you decide to yourself,

okay, I'm going to go in, this is an amber situation,

and I'm going to buy a one-third of the size that I ideally want to have at current market levels.

You leave your powder dry a little bit,

and then the stock trades down to support.

Then you put on a full position size,

and then the stock actually breaks support.

Well, in this situation,

if it's accompanied by some sort of fundamental change,

whether that's a macro change in the larger global macro context,

and it's affecting all stocks, or it's a sector issue, or even a single stock issue.

It's an issue that only affects this stock. If it's accompanied by some sort of fundamental change,

then yes, you would probably cut the position.

And what would actually happen in the opposite scenario?

Let's say you pull up this stock and you buy a one-third or half position size.

You're getting your toe wet, and then the stock rallies pretty aggressively trades at

resistance then through resistance pretty easily and then has broken out well as long as it's

accompanied by a fundamental shift in the news flow you would most likely be adding to that position and

getting up to a full position size and running the position as a winner. So

essentially what's happening in that scenario is your amber conditions are

becoming a green light condition. And in the opposite scenario where you've

bought at an average price which is very close to support and then it breaks

support to the downside, that's your amber conditions becoming a red light

condition. And yes, everything we've

just been through there with a fundamental predisposition of bullish

applies in the opposite when you have a context of a fundamental predisposition

of bearish and you have a ranging stock like this.

Coming into this situation with a bearish fundamental predisposition,

you would obviously love to try and short stock at or very close to the red line resistance,

but sitting around and waiting for it to get there, you may miss it. So you'd have to pick your

spots or just try to get some sort of position on at current prices and improve your average price if it goes higher.

And if it does go lower and break support, you will do what's called leaning into the stock.

And as long as it's accompanied by a fundamentally bearish change in conditions or a catalyst,

change in conditions or a catalyst, then yes, getting on a full position, it's essentially an amber turning into a green light. And then in the opposite scenario, if you short this stock,

where you short summer current levels, improve your average price. So your average price is around the resistance level so just below that or

near the resistance level and then it just continues going higher what do you

do in that situation well that's your amber conditions becoming a red light

condition and if you can see that this breakout is accompanied by some sort of fundamental change or a positive catalyst coming out, or it could be even a lack of negative catalysts, in that situation, you're probably cutting and trading out.

So you can see why ranging stocks are quite tricky to deal with when it comes to technical analysis and your timing of stocks where you actually have a fundamental predisposition.

Because there is no defined trend and you're going into the stock waiting for the trend to occur. So firstly, you have to ask yourself some serious questions

that over the 20 to 60 day time horizon

is my fundamental predisposition and my catalysts

actually going to get this stock to move out of the range.

So that provides another layer of thinking

in terms of whether we're timing this properly.

Additionally, even if you're very well behaved and systematic, where you go into the stock

from an execution perspective, and you're doing this very conservatively and buying one

one-third position, shorting one-third position,

or going long a half position,

or going short a half position,

of course, you can still get caught out

because the stock can actually break down

after you've gone long and break support,

or it can break out to the upside

and break resistance when you're short. Now the obvious

question here to get around all of this is to simply ask well why don't I just wait till a stock

breaks out of a range to the upside if I've got a fundamental predisposition of long?

And why don't I just wait for a stock to break down through support if I've got a fundamental predisposition of short?

Well, the answer is fairly straightforward, actually, because you know nothing about the

order flow that's actually in the market at the particular levels

of resistance and support. So for example, if we look at Bill Holdings here and we look at the red

resistance line, what do we know about the player, the entity that's in the market that's selling the stock at that price.

Well, we don't know anything and we can't know anything unless you were the person themselves,

the entity themselves, managing that order, or you were the trader sitting at an investment bank

who is literally working the order in the market. We don't know whether this order

is tiny or huge or even somewhere in between. We just don't know anything. So a natural response

to that from a technical analyst would be, well, if it breaks the resistance, then surely

it means the order is finished and then the stock is just going

to go higher. Well, not necessarily. Again, you don't know anything, even in that situation.

The entity that's selling the stock at, let's say, $167.5, let's say that's their limit.

$167.5. Let's say that's their limit. What if it is actually a huge order to stop? And let's say the order in total is to sell 2 million shares, which is a huge order in this stock with a stock

price of $167.5. So let's say it's 2 million shares

and the entity,

the pension fund, who's making those sales

has only given the

investment bank

50,000 shares for sale.

And let's say when the

stock actually gets to that price

he sells the last piece of that part of the total order.

So he sells the last piece of the 50,000.

And then the stock goes up quite violently.

All the technical analysts jump on it and say,

okay, now is the time to buy the stock.

They all go long.

And the only reason why it's trading where it's trading is because the guy's gone to the bathroom

and when he comes back from the bathroom, he's going to reload on his order

and give the investment bank another 50,000 shares for sale.

And I can tell you now, having worked at an investment bank,

having worked at an investment bank, it literally can be the case that the pension fund has gone off to lunch or gone off to the bathroom for 15 minutes and then they come back and they reload on their order.

And then as the trader, the order goes back into the system with a 167.5 limit.

And then the stock just goes there.

And then all of the technical analysts

who were jumping all over the stock

above 167.5 going long, thinking there's a breakout,

then have to cut by the end of the day.

And by the way, obviously,

everything happens in the opposite

if we're considering shorting.

So if it goes through support, it could literally be that the buy order is finished for that moment,

and then 20 minutes later, it's going to reload.

The point is here, guys, when you pull up a ranging stock like this,

where you have quite well-defined support and resistance levels,

you have to tread very carefully.

It's very tricky.

And again, there is no rulebook.

There's no rulebook that says you have to do a certain thing

when something happens to the chart at certain levels,

especially when it comes to ranging stocks

and there's potential breakouts and breakdowns.

You just have to tread carefully

because you don't really know anything

that's really going on behind the price move.

And anyone that tells you that they do is just lying.

They have about as much clue as you do as to what's really going on behind the price.

But if there genuinely is a fundamental reason or catalyst why something has broken out,

so the breakout is accompanied by very bullish news flow,

or in the opposite, bearish news flow

for a short, then

it's fairly likely,

it's highly likely, that

orders

that were in the market at resistance

and support are either

going to be pulled, or

Or they're going to be put back into the market with, on the buy side, lower limits and on the sell side, higher limits.

So with ranging stocks, you just have to tread carefully, recognize that there is no defined trend yet.

is no defined trend yet. Recognize also that you're not particularly fighting the market here because the market at the moment, in a ranging situation, is essentially undecided

in terms of direction. So the direction isn't a trend and the market is undecided. So it's most likely to be an

amber scenario and you're going to tread carefully, but also ask some serious questions about

your fundamental predisposition and the catalysts occurring within the 20 to 60 day time horizon.

within the 20 to 60-day time horizon.

Okay, so we've done trending stocks upwards and downwards.

We've looked at ranging stocks with support and resistance levels.

Now we're going to look at some very well-known chart patterns and what we would be likely doing in terms of timing with these chart patterns.

So what we have actually done so far and what we did with the traffic light system

and with the assumption of having a fundamental predisposition in place.

When we went through those examples of going through trending and ranging stocks and

applying the red light conditions, so no trade or wait, the amber conditions where we can potentially

have a partial position, or the green light conditions where we can have a full position,

or the green light conditions where we can have a full position,

this is how we marry up our timing with fundamentals.

And by going through those examples first with trending stocks and ranging stocks, what we've actually done in the process is we've established a set of principles or best practices.

we've established a set of principles or best practices. But always remember, guys,

there is no hard and fast rule book here where you have to do a very specific thing in every situation. These are simply principles that we stick to and some best practices that we try to stick to in most scenarios,

and it's a probabilistic approach.

So now that we have the principles laid out for these best practices that we engage in,

so in terms of whatnot,

not to do and what to do probabilistically in certain situations.

We're going to look now at these common TA patterns.

And we are going to go through them quite quickly because the same principles that we outlined

for trending and ranging stocks apply to all of these patterns.

So the first one we're going to look at is the reversal pattern of head and shoulders.

So this is our first reversal pattern that we're going to look at.

And the example here is in ExxonMobil.

is in ExxonMobil. And what we're going to do here is run through a simple example of what you would be thinking if you came across this situation in any stock, if you were sitting in the time of August 2020.

So imagine pulling up this chart, you're sitting at your desk, you have a fundamental

predisposition of bullish and it's August 2020. So ignore everything on the right hand side

from September 2020. Just imagine you're sitting in, say, the third week of August.

And you pull up the chart and you've identified here that there's a head and shoulders formation

occurring in the stock. So the head and shoulders formation, the first shoulder, which is on the

left-hand side, highlighted in red, is formed.

Then the head is formed, highlighted in yellow.

And then the second shoulder is on the right-hand side and is almost fully formed.

Well, you would draw a support line across from the left shoulder.

And this support line is known

as the neckline to the head and shoulders formation. And if you're walking

into this with a fundamental predisposition of long, this is a very

common technical analysis pattern where if it breaks support it's probably

going to go lower for a sustained period of time.

So with a fundamental predisposition of bullish, this is highly likely to be a red light.

The message you're probably taking from this is that the timing is probably not good

and that maybe you're too early to the trade.

You would stick it on the watch list and come back to it in a few weeks' time and see if it has broken that neckline.

Now, what if it doesn't break that neckline and does a bit of work around?

around that support level and then goes higher.

Well, that might actually warrant an amber situation,

but of course it's situational and you have to marry this up with the fundamentals.

So at the time, as long as the fundamentals are in place,

it means potentially that the technical pattern of the head and shoulders formation

has not played out.

And that could actually be not an amazing entry price, but a decent entry to have a partial position that you can add to on further price and chart confirmation to the upside.

Now think of this in the reverse scenario where you're going short. If it broke the neckline to the downside, that's when you have confirmation that the head and

shoulders formation has actually played out and you would feel pretty good about shorting

it on a break.

So you could go in and have a half position or even close to a full position, or if you're feeling super confident,

you could actually put on a full position there.

Now, of course, we're not looking here about whether

the short would have worked out over the long term.

We're going through the exercise here of imagining

that we were sitting at our screens doing this work at the time of August 2020.

So everything to the right of that, we would not even know it existed at the time, of course.

So when we're charting, what we're actually doing here,

because we are 20 to 60 day time horizon. We're one to three

months. We're looking over many months at the daily data because we have to zoom out and look at the

big picture to see what the likely situation is in terms of timing for the upcoming 20 to 60 days.

for the upcoming 20 to 60 days.

And this is really an example of getting the bigger picture,

the big things right.

And that is actually way more important for us as long-short portfolio managers over a 20 to 60-day time horizon

versus looking at, for example, four hour or one hour candles over five day

or one trading week period and penny pinching.

If it looks like good timing to us for the 20 to 60 day time horizon in the bigger picture,

it's very likely that we're going to be doing something.

in the bigger picture, it's very likely that we're going to be doing something.

I'm not worrying too

much about whether you

buy a stock

at $41.50

or $41.40.

We're not exactly

penny pinchers as

long-short portfolio managers in the 20- to 60-day time horizon.

We just want to get the big things right. But in terms of this

reversal pattern where a head and shoulders

formation breaks its neckline to the downside,

in a bigger picture monthly

timeframe with daily data, looking at it

for our context of our 20 to 60 day time horizon

a fundamental predisposition of bullish is going to be a

red light, bearish if it breaks to the downside

it's going to be a green light and

amber conditions are only going to occur if

it continues to not break to the downside

and actually shows some sort of consolidation in price and some moves to the upside

that lead us to conclude that the head and shoulders formation has not played out.

Now, the next pattern is actually the total reverse of this.

So it's a reversal pattern still, so reversal pattern number two,

but it's a reverse head and shoulders.

So it's like we've just turned the chart upside down,

and all the same principles apply here.

If, for example, we are sitting at our desks and doing our work in June 2020,

and we come into this with a fundamental predisposition of bullish,

and we see a break of the reverse head and shoulders neckline to the upside,

this is going to be a green light for us.

In the opposite of that, if we're coming into this with a fundamental bearish predisposition,

we see those conditions of a break of the neckline to the upside.

This is red light conditions.

And we just have to admit to ourselves that our timing is probably off. Maybe we're too

early to the trade. We have to stick this on the watch list and sit back and wait. And yes, you

guessed it, amber conditions. If we do get some consolidation here in price at the neckline,

we get the stock showing that it actually wants to move down we see

some evidence in that we see that the reverse head and shoulders formation has

not played out in terms of breaking that neckline to the upside then we can

think about having a partial position so So as you can see here, again, the same principles apply.

Our next reversal pattern is a cup and handle formation

where we have a price movement that represents

represents the yellow area, which we call the cup, and then we have a resistance line,

and then a consolidation period of price after the resistance line has been broken.

So taken together, this is a cup and handle formation.

yellow shaded area is the cup area and the consolidation of price above resistance is the handle. So now imagine yourself sitting at your desk. You have a fundamental predisposition of

bullish and it's the month of March 2020. What do you think you're going to be doing here?

Yes, you guessed it.

You're going to be either very close to a full position size

or indeed having a full position size on.

And imagine if the tables were turned.

You had a bearish predisposition here.

You'd obviously be

doing the opposite red light you'd you'd be not putting a position on and this is

actually a very good example of arguing with the market here and getting on the

wrong side of a very obvious TA pattern here, the cup and handle formation.

Because imagine if you were fundamentally bearish this stock sitting in March 2020, you were

dogmatic and you decided that the technicals didn't matter and you decided to short the

stock.

Well, within a few days or a week or two, you are out and you

were down big. And just as a side note, guys, you know, obviously we're looking at real examples

here in the financial markets at certain periods of time. Just remember, these are only examples.

We're not saying here that you should be generating

ideas in these stocks or similar stocks and going long or short. What we're doing here is just using

them as examples to show you the chart patterns that they happen in the real world and what you

probably should be doing in terms of your timing

when you're marrying it up with fundamentals.

So these examples apply to all stocks.

So obviously with our 20 to 60-day long-short portfolio management approach

and what we've been through so far,

we would obviously prefer on the long side, lower market cap stocks that are more

volatile, and on the short side, higher market cap stocks that are perhaps less volatile, but have

fundamental deteriorating conditions. So yes, some of the examples wouldn't suit our

approach but that's not the point here guys we're showing you these as examples

that apply to all stocks mid caps small caps large caps mega caps it doesn't

really matter if you pull up these chart patterns this is the approach that you

should be taking a probabilistic approach,

applying the traffic light system with logic and common sense and marrying it up with your fundamentals.

Okay, so next up, we'll continue applying the same principles

to more chart patterns.

So here we've got a reversal pattern four,

what we call a double top.

And this pattern and the next pattern, which we're going to look at, which is a double bottom,

the same principles, best practices that we looked at earlier with ranging stocks apply here.

So you see, for example, a situation here like in Pegasystems, when you pull up a chart for a stock that you're looking at, and you can see a double double top has been put in by the stock.

If you're fundamentally bullish, probably a red light, no trade, stick it on the watch list and wait,

come back in future and check again.

If you're fundamentally bearish, this is probably going to be a green light,

and an amber situation depends when you come into the stock, if it's really broken to the downside or not.

If it's hovering around after the double top, then possibly a half position or partial position adding on a breakdown.

The double bottom situation is just the opposite of that and the same principles obviously apply here as well.

So, for example, let's say you're sitting towards the end of November 2020.

You pull up a chart like this chart in advanced micro devices,

and you have a bullish predisposition.

You've witnessed in the technicals a major double bottom, where in this case,

for example, the first time the level is tested, it's tested it multiple times in that one

week, and then the bottom is tested again. So the second time it's tested, it bounces off that level.

So we have a double bottom situation.

What are you going to be doing here with a fundamental bullish predisposition?

At minimum, you're going to have an amber scenario.

whereby you take a partial position and then adding to it on a breakout

where you get a green light and you go full position size.

Why? Because you've got your fundamental predisposition,

the fundamentals are a tailwind, and now also the timing looks good.

The reverse obviously holds true if you're coming into this with a bearish predisposition, fundamentally bearish predisposition.

If there's a very obvious double bottom, we're sitting around the period of end of November, you would be very wary about shorting this stock.

And it's probably a red light and you sit back and you wait.

So again, all common sense and logic here, guys.

Next up is a continuation pattern.

And this one, our first one for a continuation pattern is a bullish chart.

And this is called a bullish flag. So how do we characterize a bullish chart and this is called a bullish flag.

So how do we characterize a bullish flag as a continuation pattern?

Well, we get a trend upwards in the stock

and then we have a consolidation period in the price

where the stock consolidates going slightly lower

after a strong bullish trend upwards

before continuing to go higher.

And this is why we call it a continuation pattern.

And the shape that the chart resembles, the bullish price move up initially is supposed to be the flagpole,

and the consolidation area of price, where price is moving lower, resembles the shape of a flag.

So imagine yourself being in a scenario where it's September 2020, like in this stock Xilinx.

September 2020, like in this stock, Xilinx. Fundamentally bullish predisposition, big fat green light, fundamentally bearish predisposition, big fat red light. You will be sitting in that time period, September 2020, and you'd be witnessing what we call in the industry a stock that is open quotes flagging close quotes of course with a fundamental predisposition

that's bullish you always have the choice not to go full position size you

can always put on a half position and then when you get the continuation add to that and then it becomes a full position

but the

signal is a trend

in the bigger picture and

given that you also have

a fundamental predisposition that's bullish

and we're assuming that you have

good catalysts here then the

signal here is strong from a technical perspective and in the context that you also have fundamentals

and catalysts in place. What about in the opposite scenario? Does a partial position warrant itself

when this pattern arises and you have a fundamental bearish predisposition I would say not in the bigger picture the trend is

clearly up the stock here has broken out and it's consolidating so imagine sitting

in September you have a fundamental predisposition that's bearish you'd be

much better off just waiting at least a few weeks to see what happens.

Overall, this type of approach,

treading carefully and taking some caution,

when you see certain technical patterns,

will actually, over many trades, over a long period of time,

not only save you a lot of money,

but also, in combination with fundamentals,

help you make a lot of money too.

So always remember when you're pulling up charts, guys,

that you need to be looking at it in terms of the context of what probably you should be doing and what you should not be doing.

Our next continuation pattern is very similar to the bullish flag,

continuation pattern is very similar to the bullish flag, but in the consolidation phase,

after we have the strong price move upwards, the chart pattern or formation resembles the shape of a pennant rather than a flag. So all of the same best practices there that we looked at with a bullish flag apply to the bullish pennant.

We have our strong move up.

We have our consolidation period before it continues higher.

So with a fundamental predisposition of bullish, we jump on it if we're in that consolidation period if uh if we have a

fundamentally bearish predisposition we stay away now we do have uh continuation patterns uh to the

downside so we're going to be looking now at the bearish flag uh and we're going to be looking at

the bearish pennant and yes all the same principles apply here as well.

It's just the same patterns as the bullish flag and the bullish pennant, but in reverse.

So bearish flag, we have our move down, our trend down, strong trend down in the stock.

our trend down, strong trend down in the stock.

We have that followed by a consolidation period where the price moves up and then price collapses.

If we're sitting in the flag area where the stock is flagging, we have a bullish predisposition.

we stay away.

If we have a bearish fundamental predisposition,

we're jumping on it.

And we can either have a full position or very close to it,

or we can have a half position or partial position

and add to that on a break lower.

Very similar situation with the bearish pennant.

Same type of approach, same principles, same best practices. For the sake of repetition, we don't need to go through it again. You pull up something

like this, like Fortune Brands Home and Security. You're sitting in the consolidation period,

regardless of whether you have a fundamental bullish predisposition

or a bearish predisposition. I think at this stage, if you've understood the traffic light

system and the principles and best practices of our timing when we're marrying that up with

our fundamentals, I think at this stage now, you know what you should be doing and also what you shouldn't be doing.

normal volume. When we get price movements in a stock, which are fundamentally based,

and the price movement is combined with an abnormal amount of volume that trades on the day or even over a few days or a week, we interpret this as a significant move or a move that's

more significant than perhaps an equivalent move that occurs on no volume

or indeed very little volume and we interpret this as significant for a few

reasons firstly if we think about this move here in Spirit Airlines,

you can see there's quite a significant move up in price on a daily basis, and it's combined

with an abnormally large amount of daily volume. It's very likely that this is a fundamental move.

But firstly, we interpret this as significant

because it means that a large seller of the stock that existed beforehand

now potentially no longer exists.

And secondly, we're making the interpretation here of significance because the stock is actually changing hands from one shareholder to another, and it's a large amount of stock. So it means that there's a potentially here a fresh buyer that's going to be a new stock.

in the market or indeed multiple fresh buyers.

So imagine if you were sitting in this situation in November 2020

and you have witnessed this abnormal volume in Spirit Airlines

and you're coming into this with a fundamental predisposition.

Well, you witness something like that.

It gives you quite a bit of

comfort that you're not the only one that has noticed these fundamentals. With a fundamental

predisposition that's bullish in this situation, you'd probably be buying at least a partial

position and then adding to the position to a full green light,

full position on a further break to the upside.

And I think it goes without saying, at this stage,

if you come into this situation

with a fundamental predisposition that's bearish,

you're running into a cave and you're going to hide.

Let's have a look at an example in the opposite.

We have an example here with Kraft Heinz. We have a situation here where there's a big

move down in the stock in February 2019. And it obviously occurs on a huge amount of abnormal

volume. So again, something fundamental has happened here, something's changed,

and current shareholders are dumping the stock.

And yes, there's probably shorts being covered,

but also new long buyers coming into the stock.

But this is in the context of the backdrop of bearish fundamentals

and current shareholders dumping the stock. And if you see what happens in the following

three months, you see that the stock doesn't even rally at all. So what's happening there?

Well, you can see in the price that the shareholders that were dumping the stock on that day where we had the abnormal volume just continue selling it.

So imagine yourself sitting there at the end of February and you have a bullish predisposition.

Well, you'd be staying away, obviously.

you'd be staying away, obviously.

You'd be pulling up this chart and just thinking your timing was really bad

and you're probably dead wrong here

and you're going to have to wait a very long time

for your full thesis to become remotely workable.

If you were coming into this

with a fundamental predisposition of bearish,

it's certainly a partial position.

If you're sitting there at the end of February

witnessing this, and

perhaps even a full position size,

remember, at that stage

you really don't know what the price

is going to continue doing.

So you have to take a measure

and sensible approach. At that stage, we don't have the benefit of hindsight. We're just saying

here, this is a probabilistic approach. And if you do a probabilistic approach and repeat that over

many trades over a long period of time, it's going to add a lot of value to your timing and your overall P&L. So abnormal volume, add that to your analysis guys,

keep that in your TA checklist, volume is very significant. So guys, that brings us to the end

of this video. Let's summarize. So when it comes to timing it's pretty straightforward

it's just sticking to a measured and balanced

common sense approach

when your timing is close to right

or you feel it's very good

of course you can have a partial position

close to a full position size

or even a full position by taking a measured

approach but what do you do if your timing is just wrong you're concerned that your timing is wrong

well if you're convinced of a fundamental long idea or a short idea and the timing looks wrong or you're concerned when you're looking at the chart patterns and formations.

You just have to sit back and wait.

Remember, a trade idea includes all of the ingredients,

and this is another reason why a strong, healthy inventory of high-quality trade ideas is so important.

You, of course, might have worked on a trade idea for a long time,

and you get to the stage of technical analysis,

and you realize it's just not the right time to go in.

In this situation, in this instance, it simply goes on your watch list.

And it goes on your watch list with the rest of those ideas that are fundamentally actionable,

but the timing is not quite right.

So we said we'd cover this briefly earlier in the video.

What is an actual watch list?

What does a watch list actually look like?

What should be in actual watch list? What does a watch list actually look like? What should be in your watch list?

Well, your watch list is just simply a list of all of the stocks

that you've done a full fundamental appraisal on

and you believe they are either a fundamental or watch list long

or fundamental or watch list short. But they either lack catalysts or good

timing or both for the direction within the 20 to 60 day time horizon that is immediately right now.

now. So imagine this in terms of the step-by-step processes that we go through. At this stage, you

will have filled out the fundamental sections of the trade idea template. But you've perhaps

struggled on the catalysts or the technicals or price action, and even possibly the trade structure

that make up a full definition of a trade idea.

In a situation like this, you just have to be intellectually honest with yourself.

It's more likely that in this situation that you've discovered an investment idea rather than a trade idea.

And that means an investment time horizon. So yes, it can be an investment time horizon

applied to both a long or a short. But in this situation, just be intellectually honest

with yourself. If the catalysts are not there, if the timing is not there, or a mixture of

both, or trade structures look problematic, it's more than likely that you've discovered an

investment, long or short, rather than a trade. So in your processing, it would be a sensible idea to split out your actionable trade idea templates.

So these are positions that you're actually going to be putting on because everything lines up.

Split them out from your non-actionable trade idea templates because the non-actionable ones would really be defined as investment horizon ideas.

Now, if there are identifiable catalysts, you should be, with high conviction fundamental

analysis, you should be seeking to get the position on within 20 days because your view

is that it will move in the next 60 days.

However, at the same time, if the timing continues to look wrong,

you don't fight the technical analysis.

All that we're doing here with technical analysis

is we're trying to get more favorable prices on our entry and our exit,

and it's a judgment call with the information

that you have. In the long, short portfolio 20 to 60-day remit, we're very much more trying to catch

the bigger tailwind. We're not trying to pick the bottom or the top because we know that that is just an

impossible task. With trading and even investing you just have to accept that

you're going to be wrong the moment you put a position on.

When you buy something it's more than likely that the stock is going to

go lower before it goes higher and when you short something it's more than likely that

the stock is going to go higher before it goes lower.

All we're doing here with our technical analysis is we're trying to add value to our timing

and our execution.

So what we're trying to do is perhaps buy a stock at $95 after first looking at it when

it was $101 and showing positive technicals.

Or we're trying to short a stock at $107 after first looking at it when it was $101 and showing negative technicals.

Or indeed, we're buying on breakouts and we're selling short on breakdowns or reversals and continuations.

So we have both the fundamentals and the technicals on our side.

And don't forget, we're also using technical analysis to tell us

as much about what we should not be doing versus what we should be doing.

Now, we also don't just use technical analysis for entry points.

We also use technical analysis for exits.

So when we're exiting positions, we do also use technical analysis as a tool

to try and get out at favorable prices and even for when we're cutting losses.

What we're always trying to do here, and this is the mindset you have to go into technical

analysis with, what we're always trying to do here with TA is to use it to add value to

our executions and risk management.

So adding value to our timing.

and risk management. So adding value to our timing. It's really not good enough as a trader portfolio manager in the long, short equity space, 20 to 60 day time horizon. It's really

not good enough just to do your fundamental work and then have absolutely no care in the world about your timing.

Timing is crucial to an overall trade idea

and the difference in performance over many trades

over a long period of time between somebody

who is cognizant of their timing and is good at timing their positions

and adding value to their execution and risk

management versus somebody who just doesn't engage in it and or just doesn't care. The difference

over a long period of time over many trades can be significant. So yes, the bulk of our work in the

trade idea generation process is done at the fundamental stage. If you recall, around 80, 90% of our work is done at the fundamental stage.

But if we find what we think is a great fundamental, long or short, and then we ignore

ignore the timing or we have very bad timing all the time, when we're entering positions for the 20 to 60 day time horizon,

we can just end up doing very poorly in our position, even though our idea is good.

So we're essentially not optimizing our fundamental position.

And that, unfortunately, in trading and even investing is a cardinal sin.

So imagine doing all of your work on a stock.

You come to a fundamental predisposition of bullish.

You pull up the chart.

You actually recognize that the timing might be pretty bad, but you don't care anyway.

And you just go into the stock.

It goes against you for 30 days.

You trade out of it because you can't handle the loss

and then the stock goes up 400% over the next year.

Your fundamental work was probably absolutely spot on

but because you had no sense of timing

or you didn't care,

you end up trading out of the position

when it goes against you by, say,

10%, 15%, and you lose money when you should have actually made money.

That's the cardinal sin. This is why timing and having an appraisal for timing and marrying up

technicals and price action with your fundamentals is so important.

So yes, it is in the minority of our work because it really doesn't take that long

and it just requires a bit of understanding and common sense.

But definitely don't underestimate the significance

and the power of good timing

as part of an overall trade idea generation process.

Okay, so that's it for chart patterns in technical analysis.

Let's go straight over to the next video, and let's look at price action.