Okay guys, welcome back to the computer screen. We are going to move on now further in our trade

idea generation process. Welcome to video 24, Quantitative Processing 3. So we're getting pretty deep now into the PTM video series. And I think it's about time now

that we introduce you to the quantitative and qualitative dashboard. So if you recall,

in the first part of the PTM video series, when we got to the end of the first part with our macroeconomics and our leading

indicators, we ended up with a very comprehensive leading indicator dashboard or a macroeconomic

dashboard. In the second part of the video series, we are working on microeconomics, bottom-up processing.

And this dashboard is the quantitative and qualitative dashboard taken together on microeconomics and on microeconomics dashboard create an overall trade idea generation process. So when you put these two dashboards together,

this is your key to the entire trade idea generation process. Now on the left hand side,

we have our most important first step quantitative sector filtering metrics.

quantitative sector filtering metrics. So if you recall from the previous couple of videos,

we have market capitalization, earnings growth, revenue growth, and price earnings ratio.

In this video, we're going to be having a look at peg ratio. We're also going to be looking at enterprise value, EBIT and EBITDA,

EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA. This on the left hand side is the area that is our first step in the bottom-up microeconomic quantitative section of the trade idea generation process.

In the middle of the dashboard,

you will see other quantitative metrics.

And these are all financial measures of a company

that we look to as traders and portfolio managers if it's required to do

further work if we can't find our answers in the first step. Third, on the right-hand side of the dashboard, you

will see the qualitative area of the dashboard.

So we have three areas.

Our first step quantitative filtering metrics,

our other quantitative metrics that we look to do further work

if it's required.

And then we have our qualitative assessment,

which involves looking at a company's key performance indicators.

Now, it's very important that we define these areas of the dashboard as to whether they are

forward-looking metrics or backwards-looking metrics. In the first step of the quantitative process, our most important measures are the forward-looking measures.

We then look to financial measures that are backwards-looking both in the first step and in the second step in order to fill in the bigger picture and to understand companies better. So we're learning

more about the companies and getting more information about a stock. And in the third

section, the qualitative section, we have both backwards and forward-looking KPIs that are unique to the company and to the sector. But without question,

the perspective that you should be coming from all the time is that forward-looking metrics

are the most important for making trading decisions. And our backwards-looking metrics are essentially information to help us fill in the bigger picture to simply understand companies and stocks better.

So you're going to become very familiar with the quantitative and qualitative dashboard and the processes that we go through as we make progress through the PTM video

series. So don't worry about it too much at the moment. This is just a visual introduction of what

we've looked at so far in the trade idea generation process within micro and where we are heading in

the rest of the PTM video series. Now, as mentioned, we are going to be looking in this video at PEG ratio.

And unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on which way you look at it, it's unfortunate for

people who think this way, but fortunate for those that don't. A PE peg ratio is as misinterpreted as PE ratio by many individuals in the market.

A peg ratio is simply a valuation metric that's built on the standard PE ratio, and it's

calculated by dividing forward PE by forward earnings growth. And we take the current year,

which is still forward looking, and the following year. So it's worked out firstly as PE. So the stock

price live in the market right now, divided by forward earnings per share, and then divided by forward earnings per share percentage growth.

So forward, e.g., forward earnings growth.

Now, in conventional or traditional academic finance theory,

we've already seen this in previous videos when we talked about price-earnings ratio.

seen this in previous videos when we talked about price earnings ratio. In traditional academic finance theory, they will tell you high PE translates into the word expensive, which is implying that a

stock or a company is overvalued. And what would be the implied action on that? It would be to sell a long position or go short.

In traditional academic finance theory, a low PE translates into the word cheap, which implies a company or a stock is undervalued.

a company or a stock is undervalued. And what does that translate into?

What action does it translate into?

It implies to initiate a long position

or cover a short position, meaning you buy the stock.

Similarly, because PEG is worked out as PE

over the EPS growth rate,

over e.g., the earnings growth percentage. So similarly, with

PEG ratio, a high PEG and a low PEG supposedly translates into expensive and cheap, respectively.

Nonsense. Tear up your university finance theory textbooks.

Academic finance says that a peg below one means cheap and a peg above one means expensive.

As you should know by now, academic finance theory is nonsense.

Tear up your university textbooks. It's complete bullshit. Cheap and expensive

means nothing for traders. Something can stay cheap forever and something can stay expensive

forever. From the context of a peg ratio, well, a peg ratio, what does it represent? It represents the price the market is willing to pay for a company's forecasted earnings per share percentage growth.

Similar to the PE ratio, there is no such thing as cheap and expensive.

A peg ratio can stay the same while a stock rises and falls.

So let's have a look at an example here.

Let's have a look at a stock that we've just called Stock A.

The stock price currently live in the market is $10 per share.

The forward EPS is $1 per share.

Therefore, the price earnings ratio is 10 times earnings, a PE ratio of 10.

The EPS growth, forward EPS growth, is 20%.

So what's the PEG ratio?

It's 10 divided by 20, which gives us 0.5.

0.5. Now we can use the PEG formula to work out some other very interesting and important information when we wish to do so. So, for example, if we wanted to work out last year's reported EPS

without even looking at it, well, that can be obtained by simply discounting this year's

expected forward-looking EPS by the expected EPS growth percentage. So last year's EPS can be worked

out by taking the $1 forward EPS and dividing by 1.2, which is the 20% earnings growth, and we

get 83.33 cents.

Of course, we would always check the reported EPS because it's public information, but this

is a good way of reconciling it and making sure that last year's reported

EPS, we have it accurately in our trade idea generation process, and also that we have our

forward-looking earnings growth correct in our trade idea generation process.

Additionally, if we're sitting in the market at any one moment in time and a company announces, let's say, a material change the company that was previously expecting forward EPS of $1,

they cite a material change in business conditions, and they guide lower to $0.90.

Well, this changes the EPS growth estimate from 20% to 8%. So we know our last year reported EPS through our two methods. Firstly,

checking the publicly available information as it's reported and also reconciling with our previous

forward-looking estimate of $1 of earnings and 20% earnings growth. We know that last year's EPS

was 83.33 cents. If they guide down forward-looking EPS to 90 cents, then we can work out the percentage earnings growth very easily. 90 cents minus 83.33 cents divided by 83.33 cents,

which in this example gives us 8%.

What we can also do very usefully is solve our PEG formula for P.

So we solve for the stock price.

And what we can do is we can solve it for the stock price that keeps the peg ratio constant.

So we solve the peg formula for P.

Now, if we plug in our numbers to our peg formula,

Now, if we plug in our numbers to our PEG formula, our PEG formula is stock price divided by our new forward-looking EPS number divided by our new forward-looking earnings growth percentage number.

And we want to solve for the PE peg ratio of 0.5.

So we want to know the stock price for this formula that makes the peg ratio 0.5.

We rearrange the formula to make the subject P,

and we calculate it as 0.5 multiplied by 8% multiplied by 90 cents,

which gives a stock price of $3.60

if we maintain the same peg ratio level of 0.5.

And if you recall, our original stock price

in this example was $10.

So in this example, what has happened here? Well, the company has downgraded guidance

and guided the market lower from a forward-looking EPS number of $1 per share.

And they've downgraded to a guidance of $0.90 per share, so $0.90 EPS.

And what we can very easily work out from that move in EPS

is work out if the market paid the same level of peg ratio

in the new dynamic versus the old dynamic.

If we make that assumption, where will the stock trade

if it's valued by the market under the same assumption?

So in this example, a 10 cent move

down from $1 to $0.90 in forward-looking EPS, by keeping peg ratio constant, that $0.10 move

has resulted in a fall in the stock price of $6.40. So from $10, that's a 64% drop to $3.60. Now, as traders and PMs, this is just useful information to know

for a couple of reasons. Firstly, we can look at the sensitivity of valuation and stock price

to a change in EPS. And don't forget, this could also happen

in the positive as well.

So a company could cite a material change

in business conditions to the upside,

not just the downside.

So we could use this formula

to work out upside as well as downside. So what we're doing here as traders

and portfolio managers is essentially working out what the potential downside and upside could be

based on similar valuation metrics in new dynamics. Additionally, it also shows very obviously that a stock can go

down as much as it wants and still be on the same peg ratio. And the opposite holds true. A stock

can go up to a level of whatever it wants and the peg ratio can still be on the same level.

So always, always, always remember, a stock can go from any price to its lowest price

possible and still maintain the same peg ratio. And a stock can go from its lowest price possible to any price possible

and still maintain the same peg ratio. Cheap and expensive are curse words in professional trading

circles. Nothing is ever cheap or expensive for traders. Both price earnings ratio and peg ratio are a

signal of the quality of the earnings of a company or stock. Always think to yourself the following

when you're going through your trade idea generation process. We mentioned this in previous videos.

What price is the market willing to pay for

or willing to sell the earnings of the company at?

There must be a reason why a positive outlier

trades on a premium 10%.

to the sector and a reason why this negative outlier trades on a discount to the sector.

And of course, always recall, there's nothing you know that the market doesn't already know.

And the market can always stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent.

Don't argue with the market.

then you can stay solvent.

Don't argue with the market.

Now, when it comes to peg ratio,

as you're going through your processes,

you are going to treat peg ratio in the same way as you treat

PE ratio and earnings growth.

You're going to look at peg ratio

on a relative basis within a sector. So you look at a

company's peg ratio compared to other stocks. And here, we're going to be looking again at Shopify,

Wayfair, and Overstock. And in the table that should be familiar to you by now,

we have filtered here for PEG1.

So if you look at the chart, you can see the column

for PEG1.

The PEG1 for Shopify, if you look in the column,

is a total mess because of the negative 0.22% number, which is in the EG1 column.

So remember, the PEG ratio is the PE divided by the earnings growth number.

And because of the laws of small numbers here, the PE of 287 is divided by the 0.22% negative number. So we get a crazy

peg, what for Shopify. The number could be very, very different by tiny marginal changes in this

changes in this 0.22 negative number. It could be divided by zero. It could be divided by 1, 2 or 3%

or even negative 1, 2 or 3% and we would get very, very different numbers. And this is going to happen to you a lot when you go through your processing. You are going to see some wild numbers because of

the law of small numbers. Don't worry about that for the moment. We are going to see some wild numbers because of the law of small numbers.

Don't worry about that for the moment. We are going to come onto this later in the trade idea

generation process. Now, from our previous work on valuation and on this sector, we learned quite

quickly that in this sector, the market is looking beyond current year earnings.

So looking beyond year one.

And focusing also very heavily on revenue growth.

Additionally, when we look at peg ratios,

for Overstock and Wayfair, we learned some important information in that we know Overstock

has a higher earnings growth 2 number than earnings growth 1. And if we have higher earnings growth

percentage in EG2 versus EG1, then PEG2 will be lower than PEG1 as it stands at that moment in time.

Why?

Because we're dividing PE by a bigger number in period 2.

Therefore, the peg is going to be lower than in peg 1.

And you can see this very clearly in the overstock example where we have earnings growth 1 of 7.26% and earnings growth 2 of 64.66%.

We divide the PE by those numbers and we get the PEG 1 and the PEG 2 respectively. We get a PEG1 of 9.23 and a PEG2 of 0.57.

So what we're seeing here with Overstock, not as extreme in terms of a move with the law of small numbers as Shopify, but the law of small numbers is applying here in the first period because we have a low earnings growth number

of 7.26 percent. So if we divide that 67 PE by 7.26 percent earnings growth, we just get a high

number 9.23. A small change in that perhaps if we divide divided by, say, 12, would see the peg come down by quite a lot.

But that earnings growth would be a very small difference in EPS.

So if we divided by 12, for example, instead of 7.26, it would come out at around 5.5.

five and a half. And because the earnings growth is jumping by quite a lot from 7% to around 64%, 65%, we have a much lower PEG ratio for PEG 2 versus PEG 1. Now, in the example of Wayfair,

for earnings growth 1 and 2, we do have, in period period two a much higher level of earnings growth than in EG1.

So EG2 comes in at just under 152% earnings growth, but we're coming from a negative position.

negative position. So the peg one is going to be a negative peg, and the peg two is going to be a positive peg. So the peg two is not going to be lower in this situation because

we're coming from a negative level.

So in situations like this, when you're going through your trade idea generation process,

it becomes pretty obvious that from a trading and portfolio management perspective,

we can't really read too much into the importance of the PEG-1 numbers for this sector.

What is more important here is the PEG-2 numbers, not simply because the numbers

are all skewed and messed up in period one for PEG-1, but also because we know from our previous

work, what we know about this sector is that the market is looking past current year earnings and looking towards next year's

earnings and also focusing a lot on revenue growth as well. So in a situation that's typical to this

outcome, we have to filter for PEG 2. And when we look at Shopify, the PEG 2 now comes out at 9.45.

This is obviously a very high PEG

and we obviously read into it as a positive sign,

but of course, 9.45 for a PEG ratio is pretty insane.

We'll come onto this in a moment about sensible levels

of assumptions for peg ratios from a trading and portfolio management perspective. But we do take

it as positive. We take it as a signal of the quality of the revenue and future earnings of Shopify. That's what the market

seems to be paying for. As traders, we acknowledge it and allow long-term investors to have their fun

in the stock and hold the baby. Non-participation for us is an option. If you remember, we eliminated shop as a potential trade idea due to the size of its market cap.

So as traders, we don't argue with the market.

We just step back.

We choose to not participate.

and we allow long-term investors to invest in Shopify at the valuation that they believe is justified at this moment in time and we allow them to hold the baby. For us, non-participation is an

option. And for the record, later in the trade idea generation process, we will further explain why very high market cap stocks are

eliminated from a trader's process. Now, if we look at Wayfair and Overstock on a PEG-2 basis, Wayfair has

a peg two of 0.42 and overstock has a peg two of 0.57. Now, we initially, firstly, interpret this

in a negative manner for overstock, for example, because we ask ourselves the question, why?

What's the reason? There must be a reason. Is the market willing to sell the quality of the 2022 earnings growth?

However, we also acknowledge that the stock is trading now and trades every day.

So there may be an expectation of period two already in period one and in the stock price.

already in period one and in the stock price.

So we acknowledge that there is a conflict here in the numbers in that over stocks peg one is 9.23.

So in a situation like this, we can revert to our solve 4P formula.

So we can work out for the peg to remain the same in 2022 versus 2021.

What does the stock price cut out as?

Well, when we solve for P, we're multiplying 9.23 by the 64.66% EG2 earnings growth number. And we multiply that by $2.19 EPS. And we get to

a stock price of $1,307 with a current share price in the market of overstock of $80. Now, this is obviously ridiculous

because the 9.23 number is very heavily skewed in a peg one

because of the law of small numbers

in the EG1 number for overstock at 7.26%

that we mentioned previously.

But we can make some assumptions here.

We can apply a normal healthy peg ratio, that we mentioned previously. But we can make some assumptions here.

We can apply a normal healthy PEG ratio,

which in the financial markets is between one and two

for a company that trades on a premium

to its earnings growth.

So its PE is trading on a higher number

than its earnings growth.

So a normal and healthy PEG ratio that signifies a market endorsement traditionally is around 1 to 2.

In the overstock example, the market here must be paying a premium now for something else in the future.

And if we recall from previous videos, the revenue growth of overstock in 2022.

period two was 15.62%. That was the forecasted number for overstock revenue growth in 2022.

And that number was higher than in all previous years to the COVID- possibly looking through year one and looking to year PE ratio, which if you recall

is 67, and that's divided by a low earnings growth number in period one. So to get that

PEG ratio in year one of just above nine,

you not only need a low earnings growth number,

but you also need a high PE ratio.

So it's possible here that in year one,

the current stock price in over stock

and the PE ratio is creating a high peg ratio because of the low earnings growth, because the market is looking through the current year and looking at the revenue growth in period two.

Not only revenue growth is important here for the market in 2022, but also earnings growth in period two is obviously very important. We know that for over PEG ratio in 2021 in period 1 is somewhat

reflective of what is occurring in period 2 with revenue growth of 15.62% and earnings

growth of 64.66%, We can make an assumption here of the market potentially

rewarding overstock if they deliver on these numbers in period two by putting the stock

on a peg ratio of one. And then we can solve for P. We can solve for stock price.

And when we do this, it's quite interesting because when we solve for P on a peg ratio of one using the

EG2, 64.66%, and the EPS in period two, we get to a stock price of $140.60.

So if the market rewards overstock on a peg of one in period two, the stock price has potential upside here to $140.

And this is from a current stock price at the time of recording for overstock of $80.

So this would represent a 75% increase approximately in the share price over a one-year period. Now, what else is

interesting is if you look at the difference in the PE ratios between period one and period two

for overstock. In period one, we had a PE ratio of 67. And in period two, we had a P-E ratio of 36.67. And the difference between the P-E ratios is around 80%.

So moving forward from period one to period two, if the stock price becomes reflective of fundamentals in period two, and overstock

trades on the same PE multiple in period two versus period one, which is 67, and we make

a reasonable assumption that the market rewards overstock for hitting its numbers,

then we get to a share price of roughly $140.

This outcome, combined with the EPS kicker that Overstock gets

from paring down its R&D spend, which we went over in the previous videos,

provides us as traders with upside potential.

And we've gone through our process here and recognized this.

At this moment in time, it's an identification process.

We have identified a positive outlier that now has potential upside.

And the market, it's clear, possibly thinks this too.

The question really is whether it's probable.

So the future stock price outcome of overstock

is probably going to be determined by the management's ability to stay on track and keep reiterating the 15.62% revenue growth, or even better than that, for 2022, and maybe

maintain profitability as a company coming from a loss-making position in previous years,

whilst paring down R&D spent. On current valuations, it seems the market is expecting them

to be able to do this to an extent, but they're not giving the full benefit to the company yet.

They need to deliver.

So on current valuations, the PE is reflective,

the high PE of 67 now is reflective of an expectation from the market

that they're going to be able to deliver to an extent.

from the market that they're going to be able to deliver to an extent.

We say to an extent because when you combine this with a peg ratio of 0.5 that's lower than a peg ratio of 1, it means that the market is not giving them the full benefit of delivering on this revenue and earnings growth in period

two yet.

If they deliver, then the stock will probably trade on similar multiples from a PE perspective

in period two versus period one, and will probably trade on a peg ratio that's one or higher.

And of course, no one said that in financial markets, and especially in trading,

there's no such thing as risk. If they don't deliver on this, the market, the stock will get killed.

The market will punish the stock.

So they need to deliver on the 15.62% of revenue growth or better for 2022.

And they need to make sure the needle of profitability is moving in the right direction

whilst paring down R&D spend.

If they do that, the market will probably reward them. If they don't do it, the market will probably

punish them. So if they are rewarded, they will trade on the same or higher multiple in period two

versus period one, and the stock will be essentially

re-rated. If they don't deliver, the stock will get punished and trade on a lower

multiple in period two versus period one and the stock will be re-rated to the

downside or de-rated.

Now, as mentioned many times throughout, and it's worth mentioning again,

the process here is what is important.

We will always go through similar processes

in every situation. We have price earnings ratio, earnings growth, peg ratio, and market cap

measures relative to peer group. So we have these measures for a stock relative to peer group,

to a sector. And we locate positive and or negative outliers in a sector. And we ask the obvious questions while sticking

to our traders' interpretation of valuation metrics. We keep asking and we keep digging.

As we're going through the process, we interpret what messages the market is telling us and try to come to logical conclusions.

And of course, every situation will be different and will have to be interpreted on its own merits.

But don't worry. This comes with experience and practice.

comes with experience and practice. At ITPM, we've had many people start off with no clue what to do.

And within three to six months, they know how to interpret things properly in pretty much all situations.

It's down to process. It's down to practice. it's down to common sense and logic. Now we're going to be moving on to having a look in our first step of the quantitative filtering process. We're going to

move on to looking at backwards looking financial measures. So in our example that we've been through so far in the last few videos

where we're looking at Shopify, Wayfair and Overstock, and we've been through the identification

process of the positive outliers and started to understand what the market likes and dislikes and possible reasons why,

this next step is what you would start doing if you wanted to take it further

and start learning all of the past information of, for example, Overstock,

and start looking at it in comparison to, say, Shopify and Wayfair and even other

stocks in the sector.

What we're doing here is looking at some key backwards-looking financial metrics to fill

in the bigger picture and fill in some of the gaps to understand the full picture of the story in the sector.

And of course, by going through that exercise, we will start learning a lot more about the

individual stocks that we're potentially thinking about.

about looking at for long and short ideas.

Now this type of analysis does come with caveats,

not only because it's backwards looking information

and we are traders and we look forwards,

but also because of the way as traders

we interpret valuation metrics,

which is different to the way most people in the market or traditional finance teaches.

But it is still necessary, even from a trading and portfolio management perspective, to not go into the market blind.

to not go into the market blind. We still have to go through these processes

to fill in the gaps and fill in

and understand the bigger picture.

What we're going to do in this part of the video series

is show you how these financial measures are calculated,

how they are defined,

and how we interpret them as traders and portfolio

managers, and with the caveats as well. So when you're going through this part of the process,

you'll understand and interpret these numbers a lot better than most people in the market.

people in the market. Okay, so let's first put backwards-looking quantitative measures into context here in our trade idea generation process. So far, we've looked at forward-looking

valuation and growth measures in the quantitative phase of the bottom-up section of our trade idea generation

process. And you can see the metrics that we've looked at here on the screen. Market capitalization,

earnings growth, revenue growth, PE ratio, and PEG ratio. From those forward-looking valuations,

From those forward-looking valuations, market capitalization includes price and is forward-looking. Price-earnings ratio and PEG ratio obviously also include price and are forward-looking.

And earnings growth and revenue growth are percentage differences based on forward-looking estimates of EPS and revenue. In the first part of the bottom-up

section of the trade idea generation process, so our first quantitative phase, there are, however,

further measures we can use to extend our knowledge about a sector and stocks within a particular sector.

So these are enterprise value, EV, EBIT and EBITDA. EV over EBIT, so enterprise value over EBIT and

and EV, enterprise value, over EBITDA.

But we have to remember, as traders and portfolio managers,

we are forward-looking animals.

And these measures are all backwards-looking

and are taken from a company's publicly available

annual accounts for the previous year.

As traders, we want to always be looking forward. However, we can use

these backwards looking measures and compare sector peers to each other on these metrics

to get a better understanding of the sector and stocks within the sector to contextualize

within the sector to contextualize positive and negative outliers.

So let's start here with enterprise value, EV.

What is it? What does it do?

Well, enterprise value attempts to measure a company's total value.

It's a similar measure to market capitalization, but with a twist. So market cap is the live share

price in the market multiplied by the outstanding shares in issue. And enterprise value is equal to

the market cap plus the total debt of the company minus the cash that the company has.

minus the cash that the company has.

So what enterprise value does is it captures the value of a company in theory, if it were to be taken over.

So for example, let's say a company has a market cap of $10 billion, but had $6 billion of total debt

and a positive cash position of $1.7 billion. The enterprise value of this entity would be the market cap of $10 billion plus the debt of $6 billion minus the

$1.7 billion of cash, which gives us $14.3 billion. So if an acquirer came in to this company

and wanted to buy the company outright

at the current market cap, it would have to pay off

the debts, but would use the cash towards paying off

the debts.

So they would end up paying $14.3 billion in total,

so acquiring the equity, the debt and the cash.

Now there are, from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective, limitations and caveats that do come with the calculation of enterprise value.

Firstly, there's a big question always over any company that has debt.

The question is, how is the debt actually being used?

And there is an overlap with our second consideration here, which is the quality

of operations at the company itself.

Thirdly, the market knows the debt and cash position

of the company already.

It's not like people in the market

don't understand from the last set of accounts

what the debt and cash position is of a company.

The market knows this.

And lastly, it's obviously backwards looking.

So firstly, let's deal with how the debt is being used.

So if you are looking, for example,

at sector data in a table and comparing, say, 20 stocks,

market cap, and enterprise value to each other,

you may go through the process of locating stocks

that have a lot more debt and lower cash positions than others. Now, does this mean it's a bad stock?

Not necessarily. It's important to remember that enterprise value does not measure how the debt is being used. So you have to actually go

and do the work to figure out how the debt is being used and what the debt is actually financing.

If, for example, the debt is being used to fund highly profitable current and future operations and very efficient operations, then you're probably

going to see this reflected in the market cap of the stock already, because the market looks forwards,

not backwards. How debt is being used by the company is very important. So when you're comparing

all of these stocks, just because a company has high debt and lower cash levels

than others, it doesn't mean it's a bad stock in the sector.

So the quality of operations at the company really matters.

Simply looking at the EV of a stock

and comparing it to another stock's EV may not add any value to our analysis if we're already using market cap.

The question is here is, is it really going to tell us anything new other than a statement of where it is?

A relative EV appraisal must be done within the context of the quality of the operations at the companies.

So if you haven't analyzed the operations, you can't deduce whether enterprise value is a positive

or a negative for a stock relative to other stocks. So when you're going through your process of analyzing EV on a relative basis, you must bear this in mind.

You have to learn the operations themselves.

And there's many measures of the quality of operations.

And it's totally dependent on the sector that's going to be.

you're in. Now this comes later in the trade idea generation process in the PTM

video series with our qualitative analysis and key performance indicators.

Now additionally with enterprise value we have to understand as traders that the

market obviously knows the debt and cash position of the company already. The market

really isn't that stupid. Do we really think that the market doesn't already know what the debt

and cash position of a company actually is from their last set of annual accounts. When we look at market capitalization, it's simply the price that the

collective market is willing to pay for the entire company, given all available information. So market

cap is therefore a function of every consideration already, including the debt of the company, the cash position of the company,

and the quality of the operations. Now, we as traders are by no means believers in efficient market

hypothesis. So the idea that a company stock price is a function of perfect information,

stock price is a function of perfect information. We would not be traders if this were true or if we believed that this was true. However, it's pretty obvious that the collective market can't be dumb

enough to not already know the outstanding debt and cash position of a company in its last set of publicly available accounts.

We have to assume that they see what we see. They see it. And the price the market pays for the stock,

so the market cap, is a function of this plus forward expectations of business operations.

plus forward expectations of business operations. Hence why, as traders, forward-looking measures are way more important to us.

Which brings us onto our next point, which is forward-looking versus backwards-static numbers.

So, forwards-looking dynamic numbers versus backwards-looking static accounting numbers. So forwards looking dynamic numbers versus backwards looking static

accounting numbers. So in the EV calculation, the market cap number is the

dynamic number within the calculation and it's changing every microsecond based on

forward-looking expectations. The debt and the cash position numbers

within the EV calculation are static

to the point of the company's last annual or quarterly update.

A company can take on more debt or pair down debt

plus the cash position could change.

In the last set of accounts, for example,

it may state a particular number for debt or cash,

but this can be meaningless if the company, for example,

is providing guidance that they intend to eliminate a lot of debt

and make, say, business disposals in the next one to two years

to pay off a lot of debt.

So in this situation, for example, this would now become a forward-looking,

qualitative measure and will likely get reflected in the market cap

at some point well before the financial statements are updated.

well before the financial statements are updated. So with these limitations, the obvious question is,

why as traders would we even look at enterprise value? Well, it's a good question, but it's for context. We want to have a look at the landscape of a sector and look at the EV numbers, which include our market cap plus debt plus cash position

of every company relative to each other, just to understand what the landscape is.

Additionally, we can use enterprise value and our other backwards-looking financial metrics

as either supporting or non-supporting evidence. So either confirming

or non-confirming evidence of valuation multiples like price earnings ratio and peg ratio.

So for example, when we work out enterprise value across an entire sector, and we're looking at a positive outlier that has a high PE and a good high PEG ratio, forwards looking in our valuations, if we then look at market cap and enterprise value, and we see that there's not much difference between enterprise value and market cap, it

may mean that the company has low debt levels and fairly strong cash position, which could

be a driver or supporting evidence of the high PE multiple and the high PEG ratio relative to other stocks in the sector.

However, what happens if we put our tables together, we work out all of our EV calculations,

and then we see a positive outlier high multiple for pe we see high peg ratio and then we see a

very high and big difference between evie and market cap well that just means that the company has

has got like large debt levels and possibly low cash levels.

And this would be non-supporting or non-confirmation

for our high multiple PE and our high PEG ratio.

So this would be conflicting information.

And of course, in either case, we always take it to the next stage and we put it in the context of the quality of the operations.

But in that situation, as traders and portfolio managers, we still interpret the high multiple PE ratio and the high PEG ratio in that the market must be paying for something else at the company.

And in that situation, it's highly likely that it's to do with the quality of the operations.

The key point to take away here is that it's part of the process and we follow the process.

And it's repeatable for all sectors throughout time. And we go through this part

of the process as the first part of the trade idea generation bottom-up section of the overall

process in order to get context. So when we look at valuation, we either see confirming or non-confirming information,

and then we ask further questions and we continue our further lines of inquiry.

By going through these processes, we are information gathering. We are learning more information

about the sector and stocks and understanding the context of each stock within the sector

relative to its peer group. The more information we have, the better understanding we're going to have about a particular sector and stocks within the sector,

as long as we interpret the numbers correctly and continue logical lines of inquiry and ask the right and obvious questions.

Next up in our backwards looking financial measures is EBIT and EBITDA. Now,

the difference between EBIT and EBITDA is that depreciation and amortization have been added back

to earnings in EBITDA while they're not added back to EBIT. So the definition of EBIT is earnings before interest

and taxes. And the definition of EBITDA is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation,

and amortization. And EBIT is

net earnings plus interest expense plus tax expense. And EBITDA is net earnings plus interest

expense plus tax expense plus depreciation plus amortization in the financial accounts.

Now EBIT is often referred to as operating income.

So the company's earnings prior to paying interest to creditors and taxes to the IRS on those earnings.

And with EBITDA, that is operating income with depreciation and amortization added back to profits.

and amortization added back to profits.

Now, we have to be careful with these measures and understand that these measures

are contextual to sectors that we're looking at.

So EBITDA, for example,

since depreciation isn't captured by EBITDA,

it can lead to profit distortions for companies that have a

sizable amount of fixed assets and subsequently substantial depreciation expenses. The larger the

depreciation expense, the more it's going to boost the measure of EBITDA.

So there are limitations to this and everything has to be contextual to the sector that we're

looking at. Both measures have limitations, but let's see what it looks like first to understand

the picture a little better.

So we have on the screen here

the financial statements for 2018 and 2019 for a random company.

And if you look on the left-hand side, we're looking at calculating here the EBIT.

So EBIT is net earnings plus interest expense plus tax expense.

So net earnings for this company are $39,860,000,000.

The interest expense is $500,000,000.

And the taxes are $15,1 million. So we add all of these together. So from the net earnings number we are adding back the interest

expense and the taxes to get to 55 billion 861000 EBIT. If you look on the right hand side, we have the same financial statements,

but this time to get to EBITDA, we are adding on to EBIT depreciation and amortization. And you can

can see in the set of accounts on the right-hand side,

and even on the left-hand side, it's the same set of accounts.

You can see the line item for depreciation

and amortization for 2019 comes in at $15 billion

and $3 million.

So we add this onto our EBIT calculation to get EBITDA of $70,864,000,000.

And if you haven't noticed yet, this is obviously a very big company in 2021 in the United States.

Very big earnings number, EBIT and EBITDA number.

This will be a top company in the S&P 500,

something like an Apple. So now that you've seen how it's calculated, it's a lot easier to understand

its usefulness and limitations. So the usefulness and limitations of both EBIT and EBITDA calculations.

Now, the most obvious limitation is that a company can be making money operationally, but losing money on a net basis.

At the end of the day, guys, interest, expenses, taxes, depreciation and amortization are real things.

And if a company can't make money on a net basis, who really cares if they are operationally profitable?

So we have to be really careful here when analyzing EBIT and EBITDA.

And of course, when we analyze any stock in a sector and a stock relative to other stocks in the sector,

there's obviously many things in the financial statements to consider.

So like, for example, in our Shopify and Overstock example with their R&D spend.

R&D spend is obviously an important factor for these stocks and that sector.

And we could even add R&D spend back to earnings too.

We can theoretically keep adding everything back till we get back to just revenue,

but that wouldn't be a useful exercise for us. The usefulness of EBIT and EBITDA measures

tends to be highly dependent on which sectors we are looking at. So, for example, EBIT is a more useful measure of operational performance

in the oil and gas sector, mining sector, manufacturing and infrastructure sectors,

than, for example, the service sector. So,

highly capital intensive industries. Why? Because they have very large DNA numbers,

very large depreciation and amortization numbers. So when those get added back in,

the EBITDA number flatters the operational performance of the company. So EBIT is a much

better measure or more useful measure for operational performance in those sectors.

EBITDA is a more useful measure or tends to be a more useful measure than EBIT in industries with a low capital expenditure.

So low capex.

The DNA numbers are very small in these sectors, even non-existent.

So here, it's a good measure for cash flow. So with EBIT and EBITDA, we can compare companies

in the same sector to figure out which ones have struggled in the past operationally versus those that have

excelled operationally. And we can then identify the reasons why later in our trade idea generation

process. So we look at the qualitative elements that drive the operational performance later.

And then we put this into context as supporting or non-supporting evidence of our valuation multiples, price earnings ratio and peg ratio.

Now, let's have a look at our backwards-looking financial ratios for valuation, EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA.

And these calculations are very straightforward based on calculations that we've looked at before.

looked at before. EV over EBIT is enterprise value over earnings before interest and taxes.

And EV over EBITDA is enterprise value over earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. And don't forget, it's important to remember that enterprise value includes market capitalization plus total

debt minus cash. And yes, we have our EBIT and EBITDA calculations at the bottom of the

screen there that we just looked at in the financial statements of the company that we just looked at.

So with these valuation metrics, these ratios, we have to be, again, very careful as traders

and portfolio managers, how we interpret them in traditional finance.

theory, the enterprise value to earnings before interest and taxes ratio is a metric used to

determine if a stock is undervalued or overvalued. And we put those words in quotations. So if a stock

is either cheap or expensive relative to its peer group. In relative peer group terms, traditional finance theory says

that a low EV over EBIT means a stock is cheap or undervalued, and if it's high, means it's expensive

or overvalued. But as traders and portfolio managers, we know there's fallacies to

this approach. We know it not to be true. So as traders and portfolio managers, we know that there's

going to be major flaws to the traditional finance theory approach. We learned this from our price earnings analysis. Nothing

is ever cheap or expensive. The PE valuation, if you recall, is the level at which the market

is willing to pay for or sell the earnings of the company. Similarly, the EV over EBIT ratio is the valuation level at which the

market is willing to pay for or sell the earnings of the company before interest expenses and tax

expenses. Also, we know what the limitations are of enterprise value, which is on the top line of our ratio.

So we have our four reservations here, as in how is the debt being used?

What are the quality of the operations of the company?

The market obviously knows already what the debt and cash position of the company is, and it's a backwards

looking measure. So if the market knows the debt and cash position of a company already,

do you really think the market is that stupid that they don't already know the interest expense of the debt, tax expenses, and even the depreciation and

amortization numbers from the last set of publicly available financial accounts.

Of course, the market knows this information. And also, when you think of the EV calculation of live market capitalization. So the market cap plus debt minus cash.

The debt and cash element is backwards looking from financial accounts. And the market cap number is the live

stock price multiplied by the amount of shares outstanding in issue. So what is

driving the dynamic part of the calculation of EV is the live market cap.

So essentially, if we're using backwards looking numbers at the EV level plus

market cap, so static numbers like debt and cash,

backwards-looking static numbers,

plus a dynamic forward-looking number, market cap.

And that makes up EV.

When we divide this by EBIT or even EBITDA,

it's the market cap that's potentially

driving the EV over EBITDA ratio.

Unless, of course, we're using the market cap number at the time of the financial accounts,

in which case, EV over EBIT is even worse in terms of usefulness because it's a totally backwards looking metric. So if we are

using the dynamic number for market cap, and we are using the backwards looking numbers for debt

and cash on the top line to make enterprise value, and we divide that by backwards looking

static numbers for EBIT then market cap the dynamic market cap is driving the EV

over EBIT ratio which means it's very similar to price earnings ratio except

it's backwards looking numbers that are being used in addition

to the forward looking number of market cap, which is made up of price and outstanding shares.

What we are using this for in our process is again, for either supporting or non-supporting, confirming or non-confirming

information of our forward-looking valuation metrics of both PE and PEG ratio.

So there is a very valid argument here that states that market capitalization already reflects the numbers included in the enterprise value and EBIT calculations.

Because it's reflected in the share price plus future expectations of the business operation.

Why? Because the share price is the market and the

market is forward-looking. Now, traditional finance theory would have you believe that

enterprise value, EBIT and EBITDA numbers matter more.

than price and or forward earnings because the information for EV, EBIT and EBITDA is already

reported information. It's real. It's tangible. And yes, it's true that reported information

like enterprise value, EBIT and EBITDA numbers that have and include backwards-looking static

information is real and tangible. But we are forward-looking traders. We are looking for edge

and we trade on expectation of opportunity. The real question for us as traders is whether enterprise value over EBIT

or enterprise value over EBITDA, for example. So the information adds anything incremental

to our forward PE measures. So our valuation measures of our expected future in a stock. Similarly, the same

arguments apply to enterprise value over EBITDA calculations as above with EBIT, so EV over EBIT.

But we have even more reservations. With EV over EBITDA, we are simply adding back

depreciation and amortization to EBIT to get a higher profit number. So, let's say, for example,

we are operating in a highly capital-intensive industry, and we're adding back a lot of DNA expense for, say, a mining operation.

Do we really think that the market is so stupid that they don't know that the mining business owns and operates mines with sizable fixed assets and capital expenditure?

Can we really value a mining business by analyzing earnings and completely forgetting about DNA expense and drawing sensible conclusions?

Of course not. The market already knows it exists and takes it into consideration. On the top line of the ratio,

we have enterprise value, which includes debt. And on the bottom line, we have EBITDA, which includes

depreciation and amortization. But the debt for the company has probably been used to buy the equipment that creates the actual depreciation and amortization. So again, as EBIT is a better measure for highly capital intensive industries,

and EBITDA is a better measure for low capital intensive industries when we're looking at

operational performance. EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA apply in the same way, but also including

the limitations of enterprise value versus market cap. So always bear this in mind when processing

the quant and measuring stocks relative to each other and in absolute terms.

So in terms of our trade idea generation processing, how do we use EV, EBIT, EBITDA, EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA?

What is the usefulness here and what do we use it for?

Well, in our trade idea generation processing, we can, of course, add columns to our spreadsheets

to include EV, EBIT, EBITDA and EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA and make comparisons across a sector,

so across stocks. However, we have to understand the interpretation properly.

We've seen the drawbacks of EV and EBIT and EBITDA, so we have to be very careful with our interpretation. Our starting point in

processing is identifying what the market likes and dislikes, then moving on to ask the questions,

why? Why does the market like a particular stock? Why does the market dislike a particular stock?

Why does something trade on a premium? Why does something trade on a premium?

Why does something trade on a discount?

What is the justification for the premium?

What is the justification for the discount?

And we continue with lines of inquiry.

So we always start in our table with the following columns.

So we always start in our table with the following columns.

Stop price, market cap, EPS last year, last reported EPS, so EPS zero.

Forward-looking one-year EPS, the current year, EPS one.

Next year's EPS, EPS 1. Next year's EPS, EPS 2. Earnings growth, forward-looking in the first year, the current

year, EG 1. Earnings growth in the following year, EG 2. Price earnings ratio, forward-looking,

current year, 1. PE 1. PE 2. Next year for the second year.

PEG1 for the current year.

One year forward looking.

The current year.

PEG1.

And PEG2.

The PEG ratio for next year.

And then when we have identified.

Pulsitude.

and negative outliers, we move to the next level of our quant processing. And we start looking for

the reasons why the market likes certain stocks and why the market dislikes certain stocks and what

are the justifications behind it. So what we do is we then include further financial metrics. So we include revenue growth.

We include enterprise value, EBIT and EBITDA to our positive and negative outliers. And if we

choose to do so, we can do extra work on the whole sector to get a bigger picture understanding of why money likes certain stocks and why money dislikes certain stocks.

And what are the justifications for the premiums and discounts of stocks to each other relative in a certain sector?

relative in a certain sector. And when we do our work, if we see that enterprise value

and the EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA valuation ratios, if we see that they agree with price earnings, then we move on. So if we see supporting evidence, if we see confirmation

of EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA multiples with price earnings ratio, we move on to the next

level of our process of discovering more stock information.

If not, we continue our work to find out why there's a discrepancy.

And we keep asking the obvious questions to see if it adds anything to our understanding of a stock's valuation relative to others in the sector.

relative to others in the sector.

Additionally, because we know the limitations of some of these backwards-looking metrics,

like EBIT, EBIT and EBITDA,

we can also look for public information.

And if there's any forward-looking guidance

that's recently been published by

management on debt and cash levels for EV and for EBIT and EBITDA numbers. So if the management

is actually out there talking about the future expected levels of debt and cash. This can actually change our EV calculation.

So we can get a more accurate calculation and therefore up to date picture of

of enterprise value and for EBIT and EBITDA

if management are out there,

guiding towards, publicly guiding towards,

certain numbers for debt and cash levels

and for EBIT and EBITDA

versus the last set of annual accounts,

which is backwards looking.

And then because of that, we can also get a more up-to-date calculation and more accurate picture

of our EV over EBIT and EV over EBITDA multiples, our financial ratios or valuations based on these numbers.

So, guys, this brings us to the end of our screen session covering our second forward-looking metric peg ratio

and our backwards-looking financial measures

that are in the first stage of the bottom-up process

of our overall trade idea

generation process. Let's go back to the desk for a few words before moving on to the next video.

Okay, guys. So what did we look at there? Well, we looked at peg ratio and we also looked at

additional accounting metrics that help us in our trade idea generation process in the quant phase.

So we looked at the interpretation of peg ratio and through our example, you will have also noticed some drawbacks

of peg ratio that we have to watch out for. You're going to encounter this more in further videos

in the video series, especially when we get to short ideas. So when we start looking at X growth stocks, turnaround stories,

and value traps. So we never ever, of course, forget our interpretation of peg ratio. But

we have to make sure that we don't fall ever into statistical traps where we misinterpret numbers.

We have to use common sense all the time throughout the process.

So then we moved on from peg ratio and we looked at our backwards looking accounting metrics,

our accounting quants that are backwards looking. And the key here is, guys, to remember that it is backwards looking. We look to these

measures for further clarification as to why the market may actually like or dislike a certain stock.

And we are cognizant of their uses.

the accounting metrics uses, and their drawbacks. We do not use this information to trade on it.

We don't take positions based on these numbers. We use them because it's useful during the identification

or discovery phase in quant processing. So we try and understand what is going on behind valuation. So PE and peg ratio.

And of course, what's behind the earnings growth rates and the revenue growth rates.

It's kind of like peeling back the layers of an onion. But remember, we are still in the discovery phase. We haven't come up with a long

idea or a short idea at this stage. We are in the discovery phase and we do not trade on past

information. So we only trade on forward-looking information. Always remember that. Now, we're

going to move on to the next video. And actually,

the next two videos, we're going to be looking at the mechanics of long trade ideas first in the

next video. And the video after that, the mechanics of short trade ideas. In the next video, what is

also included is an extremely useful section,

which is going to be given by Chris Quill.

And he's going to show you in a spreadsheet class how to actually organize stock data

and process it properly in the quant phase.

So let's move over to the next video, guys.

And I'll see you back at the desk a bit later on.