Okay guys, so welcome to video number 37.

We're going to continue now with our timing appraisal as part of our overall trade idea generation process.

And we're going to be looking at price action or momentum indicators.

So how does price action actually fit in here?

So how does price action actually fit in here?

Well, in the previous video, we looked at TA, technical analysis and patterns, TA patterns, that play out frequently throughout history to judge whether our timing on a trade idea is either good, a green light, bad, a red light, or indifferent, an amber light on our traffic light system.

And we also mentioned in the previous video that if you get to the technical analysis stage of checking whether you have good timing or not, so when you're looking to turn a trade idea into a position. But if the timing didn't look right, then of course,

you can sit back and wait by just keeping it on the watch list. And this is also the case for price

action indicators. So we have to basically use both technical analysis and price action indicators together but in

understanding how price action fits in overall we have to get a bit more specific on time horizons

so with technical analysis we seek to get the bigger picture if you recall from the previous video,

we were looking at TA patterns over periods of weeks, months, and even years

to put into context our one to three month time horizon.

With price action, we look over days and weeks

to discover whether we have momentum on our side when we're entering into

our time horizon of the 20 to 60 day trading days period. So remember, technical analysis

is the study of patterns and formations, and price action is the study of momentum. And in the context of any time horizon, you have to use TA and PA in conjunction with each other in order to get the full picture and use them as accurately as possible to fit the time horizon of our process.

Our time horizon, as you very well know by now, is 1 to 3 months, so 20

to 60 trading days. Therefore, our technical analysis shows us the bigger picture, and our

for this period. However, when it comes to price action, even with price action, we still do look

at the bigger picture to put current momentum into some sort of context. And of course, we have to

remember our disciplines here. Even with price action, we have to remember that price action,

like technical analysis, is not some sort of magic we're using past price data

and false signals frequently occur now in terms of price action and momentum indicators

we do have a price action checklist for this video so we have five price action checklist for this video. So we have five price action or momentum indicators

that we're going to be looking at. And of course, you can add to this list if you want to,

but just always be mindful of the laws of diminishing marginal utility when it comes to your time in

terms of working smart, not hard. So first of all, momentum indicator one,

we're going to be looking at the relative strength index,

RSI, on a 14 day and 20 day period.

Secondly, momentum indicator two,

we're going to be looking at simple moving averages.

And for us, as traders and portfolio managers,

operating in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, we're going to be looking at simple moving averages, SMAs of 20, 60, 120, and 250 trading days.

going to be looking at exponential moving averages so EMAs over the same time horizons 20 60 120 and 250 trading days momentum indicator 4 we're going to be

looking at moving average convergence divergence or what's more commonly known

as or referred to as MACD we're going to briefly look at periods of 12, 26, and 9 days

for our MACD parameters, but we're also going to change that up

and look at it specifically for our own time horizon

for 20, 60 days, and 10 days.

And then our final momentum indicator,

momentum indicator number five,

we're going to be looking at Heiken Ashi candlestick charts.

Okay, so let's start with momentum indicator number one,

the RSI, the relative strength index.

So what is this measure?

Well, it measures the speed and change of price

movements of an asset. And it oscillates between a value of 0 and 100.

And in financial markets, there's vernacular that's used with the RSI, which

So when a stock has an RSI above 70, above the 70 level on the 0 to 100 scale, it's termed that the stock or the asset is overbought.

And when it's below the value of 30 on that scale of 0 to 100, it's termed as being oversold.

Now, just generally when it comes to stocks, very strong price movements you're going to find are usually associated with very strong fundamentals and or both panic and irrationality.

So this would be very, very strong momentum.

So a very strong price move is basically equal to strong momentum.

And the relative strength index, the RSI, is going to pick this up.

And when RSI reverses, it's argued that momentum is coming out of the move.

However, as you're going to see with the RSI calculation, an asset can go up, for example, very quickly.

So it has very strong momentum, but it can continue going further up.

So further in the same direction, but just at a slower pace, which means the RSI can fall and a stock price can keep going up.

So you have to be very, very careful in terms of how you interpret the calculation and interpret the vernacular that's attached to the calculations of RSI.

So when it comes to RSI, just a very good discipline will be to treat the terms, the vernacular of overbought and oversold in quotations with as much caution as we do when we look at fundamentals and the market refers to stocks as both cheap and expensive. But there's no denying it. Momentum is important because it can basically confirm or deny our

fundamental findings in our trade idea generation process. So if we've done our fundamental work

and we come to the technical and price action stage where we're trying to figure out whether

our timing is good, bad,

or indifferent, we might actually be quite foolish here to think that our idea is well

timed if we're looking to perhaps enter a long position when the RSI is at what's termed

as overbought levels and falling, or vice versa, if we are looking to put a short on, to enter a short position

when the RSI is what is termed oversold and rising. So although the RSI calculation and the vernacular is sometimes

misinterpreted by traders or most certainly by retail traders it's not exactly unuseful it's

actually useful but we just have to be aware of its drawbacks now the calculation for rsi

is pretty straightforward so the rsi is just 100 minus 100 divided by 1 plus relative strength. Where relative strength, RS, is the average of the days of up closes

divided by the average of days of down closes.

Now, the most common time horizon that you're going to find out there in the market

is 14 days for RSI, and it's very likely that whatever software you're using or even if you're

using free software even on the internet it's very likely that the days that they will default to

will be 14. This is the most common and most standard time horizon used for RSI out there.

most common and most standard time horizon used for RSI out there.

But you have to always ask yourself the question, what do these days represent?

Well, 14 days doesn't really represent much and doesn't represent much for us. We are 20 to 60 day time horizon traders, so we actually change this to a 20 day period.

So we actually change this to a 20-day period.

So we can highlight an example here, a real-world example of the differences between 14-day and 20-day RSI.

So if we look at this stock, for example, Newmont Mining Corp.

So Newmont Corp, NEM.

We can chart this stock in 2021

and chart the 14-day RSI

and have a look at some results.

And we've pinpointed four areas on the chart

where the RSI was briefly touching the level of 70

where the interpretation of technical analysts

would have been

but NEM was over and remember this is a 14 day RSI if you look in the bottom

left-hand corner you'll see the RSI is calculated as 14 days and what happened here on three occasions when the RSI hit 70 or just briefly below 70

very close to 70 where conditions would have been interpreted as potentially overbought by

technical analysts we can see that yes the RSI did fall after that

on those occasions, but the stock price consolidated,

did go slightly lower, but ultimately went higher.

So what's happening here is,

is that the RSI is calculating that momentum, price momentum, is coming out of the stock.

But this is a good example that it doesn't mean the stock can't go higher.

It just goes up at a slower pace.

And you can see here, for example, in the chart, where the fourth time we witnessed this in 2021 this is when the stock was at around

73.74 so the stock price 73.74 and the RSI was in the high 70s almost at the 80 level

for the fourth time in the year price momentum the RSI was slowing down and then the

the RSI dropped below 70 but you can see the stock price pretty much stayed at the same level

so the stock price didn't drop so this is a great example of a 14 dayday rs rsi and that if you'd have come into this stock at least the first

three times with a fundamental predisposition of bullish you may have been potentially buying the

stock in the first three times but let's say example, you came into the stock with a fundamentally bearish predisposition. Well, first of all, if you understand what we've discussed so far, you would put less emphasis on 14 days, so you would change this to 20 anyway. But let's say you were looking at this 14 days with a fundamental bearish predisposition you

would recognize that yes the price momentum is very positive but at the same

time if I go and short the stock it doesn't mean the stock can fall it just

means that the momentum of the price move up slows down so your interpretation

and understanding of RSI is very important

now let's look at the 20-day RSI and we get a different picture for exactly the

same stock the only time when we get a true signal of RSI condition on the 20-day RSI is that same period in May that we looked at

in the 14-day RSI. So now imagine that you are coming into this condition where you're looking

at the 20-day RSI and not the 14-day RSI, let's say in March 2021, and

you are coming into this with a fundamentally bullish predisposition.

Well, you don't have what's termed as an overbought signal, so it's likely as you go

through your TA checklist that the RSI here on the 20 day RSI would be showing you positive

price momentum and agreeing with your fundamental view.

What would have happened if you came to this stock in March 2021 with a bearish predisposition?

Well, it would have disagreed with your fundamental view, and you probably would have stuck it on the watch list

and waited for a slowdown in price momentum

and for the stock to reach an overbought condition.

So if you'd have waited and held back for a couple of months,

you would have got your genuine overbought conditions in May 2021 and

then if we just fast forward a week further from the same time horizon that

we looked at in the 14-day RSI you would see that the stock actually did

drop by a decent amount. So when it comes to entry for us as 20 to 60 day

time horizon traders, yes, we much prefer to look

at a 20 day RSI rather than a 14 day RSI,

which is basically meaningless to us.

So whatever software you're using,

whether that's a free one or paid one, you must try to change your RSI settings from 14 days to 20.

Even then, you do have to still interpret RSI properly.

properly it's a very bad habit of retail traders to think that just because an RSI is above 70 and shows what is called overbought conditions or it's below 30

and shows what is called oversold conditions it's a very bad habit of

retail traders to think that this automatically means a stock must be able to go down on overbought conditions and go up on oversold conditions.

That is just not the case.

Stock price momentum can slow down and RSI can reverse and go back in the other direction.

But it doesn't mean the stock has to.

The stock can continue in the same direction or even just be flat.

But as long as you treat RSI properly and understand it properly,

it's a good price action momentum indicator to have on our price action checklist as we're doing our

timing appraisal now next up our second momentum indicator on our price action checklist is a simple

averages. What does a moving average do? Well, it confirms or denies whether price momentum

is slowing or rising in a stock and whether momentum might be turning. But you have to

remember, similar to RSI, simple moving averages, they are lagging indicators and should only be used to confirm or

deny stock moves. How do we calculate it? Well, let's go through an easy, uh, calculation or

explanation here. A simple moving average SMA is a stock's average price over a given number of days.

stock's average price over a given number of days. So if we take the last 10 days of stock price data from any stock, let's say the last 10 days, the stock closed at 6, then 5, then 6, then 7, then 9, 8, then 8, 10, 13, and then 16. So we have 10 days of stock price data. Well, we just work out the average.

The 10-day moving average of that data is 8.8. If we then wanted to work out the three-day moving average, we look at the last three points of data, and we work out the average there. So the three-day moving average from that data is 13.

Now if we plotted both a 10-day trailing moving average

and a three-day trailing moving average on a stock chart,

in this instance, the three-day moving average

will be cutting the 10-day moving average from below.

And this would be indicating positive price momentum.

And of course, the reverse would hold true as well.

If we worked out a shorter-term moving average

from a larger data set,

and the average for the short-term moving average

was lower than the longer-term average,

at some point, that line on the chart

will have crossed the longer-term moving average from above.

And this would indicate negative price momentum.

Now, for us as 20-day to 60-day long-short portfolio managers,

our short-term moving average, so the short-term moving average that we use is 20 days. So a 20-day simple moving average is just the sum

of the closing prices for the past 20 days, the past 20 trading days, divided by 20 days, the past 20 trading days divided by 20 days.

And it's important to think of the significance here of certain time horizons.

So in trading, for whatever reason, traders generally reference the 50-day

100 day and 200 day moving averages as being significant.

But you have to ask yourself obvious questions here.

What is the significance of 50 days?

What is the significance of 100 days

and even 200 day moving averages?

Well, from what we can see and what we can tell,

there is no actual significance of those time horizons in the stock market.

Because when it comes to stocks, stock market data, and even companies, in terms of their reporting periods, 50 days, 100 days, and 200 days just simply don't mean anything.

days, 100 days, and 200 days just simply don't mean anything. So typically, on average, there's 20 trading days in a trading month. So a short-term simple moving average, we use as 20 days.

So we have a one-month simple moving average. And then we also have 60 days, which is significant for a couple of reasons

for long short portfolio managers for our medium term simple moving average, which is for three months.

Why? Because firstly, 60 days is equivalent to three months of stock market data. So we have our one month and our three month simple moving average.

And secondly, 60 days is important in terms of trading data

because companies themselves report on a quarterly basis.

So between quarterly earnings reports, on average,

we're going to have around 60 trading days.

We also look at half a year or two quarters.

So we look at 120-day simple moving averages.

And we also look at a full financial calendar year.

financial calendar year, so a calendar reporting period of one year taken together 20, 60, 120, and 250 days, we have our short, medium-term, and long-term simple moving averages for the stock market.

Why? Because these numbers actually mean something, unlike 50, 100, and 200 days,

mean something unlike 50 100 and 200 days which don't mean anything so how does this look when we actually amend our software from 50 100 200 days to 20 60

120 and 250

Well, here we have the S&P 500 cash index displayed on the chart.

You can see we have price there, and we also have our 20, 60, 120, and 250-day simple moving averages charted as well.

And generally speaking, if you think of our simple moving averages as short term, medium term, and long term,

a 20-day simple moving average

crossing a 60-day simple moving average

tends to confirm or deny three-month views.

So for our time horizon, 20 to 60 days.

So if we apply this to the recent history of this chart

for the S&P 500 cash index,

and we look at May 2020,

as the world was coming out of the COVID sell-off

and there was still a lot of chaos going on,

you can see on the chart at the beginning of May 2020,

the 20-day simple moving average was crossing the 60-day simple moving average from below and indicating to us strong short to medium term price movement.

Then if we fast forward to July 2020,

we get the 60-day simple moving average crossing the 120-day simple moving average.

This happens almost right at the beginning of July 2020,

and then very soon after,

the 60-day SMA crosses the 250-day from below.

And for us as 20- 60 day long short portfolio managers,

when we see conditions like this in the bigger picture on a chart, a 60 day SMA crossing a 120 or 250 SMA tends to confirm or deny six month views. Now, of course, we don't have six-month holding

periods for either longs or shorts at all. But if we pull up a chart in the bigger picture

and we see conditions like this occurring in recent history into the context

of our fundamental predisposition and we apply the traffic light system and by default at this stage

you should know what your actions should be. So green light trade, amber light consider trading or half a position or a partial position red light

do not trade so when it comes to moving

averages simple moving averages we again

put into context about 20 to 60 day time horizon

We are three-month, 20-60-day long-shore portfolio managers.

Therefore, our charts have to reflect the time horizon that we're seeking to take positions in.

We are trying to predict where the price will be in one to three months' time, and we require momentum on our side.

So when we're looking at 20 to 60 day time horizons looking forward

with simple moving averages to understand the current momentum in the market, we have to

understand the bigger picture first and look at longer term charts of perhaps two years or even a

bit longer. So we do still with price action, look at the bigger picture to put

what we believe to be current momentum into the context of our time horizon. So typically, and there

is no genuine hard and fast rule book here, guys, but typically we will start at two years,

and then we will zoom in to a one-year chart then we'll zoom in to perhaps the

last two quarters and or the year-to-date chart and then finally we'll be looking at the current

quarter so the last three months. So when we're analyzing our simple moving averages, 20, 60, 120 to 50 days, we get the bigger picture

first, then we zoom in to look for any significant technical analysis patterns, and then we look for

more shorter term price action momentum. And we just visually or optically compare it to periods in the past.

So for example, if we take a stock like Wingstop, so W-I-N-G, Wing, we can look at roughly a two-year period using daily data for the price chart and then calculate our 20, 60, 120 and 250

day simple moving averages. And what we want to understand first is with our 20 and 60 day SMAs,

what happens in terms of time horizon when we get crossings of the 20-day SMA crossing the 60-day SMA, whether

that's from above or below.

So this will give us perspective moving forward for our 20-to-60-day time horizon.

So if we look back to 2019, for example, we will see that the 20-day simple moving average for wing crosses the 60-day

moving average from above, so bearish signal, and this happens in September 2019.

And then if we look forward to when it then crosses,

crosses from below. And we just count the number of months that this took. So it crosses from below in December 2019. Now, of course, you can calculate the exact amount of trading days that this took. But at this stage, we're just looking at this visually, optically to get an appreciation, a rough estimate of how long this actually takes.

So roughly speaking, back in 2019, from the moment that the 20-day crossed the 60-day SMA

from above to when it crossed from below, we're looking at three months.

If we then fast forward into 2020, the next time it crossed from above is in March 2020.

This was obviously the violent sell-off associated with the economic shutdown and COVID-19.

And then the 20-day crosses the 60-day from below. If we fast forward again, it crosses from below in April.

So with that violent move down, there was a quick and violent move up.

So our time horizon there was a period of around one month.

Next time the 20 day crosses the 60 day from above is in September 2020.

So the time difference there is five months.

And then from September, the next time,

the 20-day crosses the 60-day moving average from below. We're looking at December 2020.

So again, roughly speaking, three months.

Fast forward again to find out when the 20-day SMA

crosses the 60-day from above.

We're looking at March 21.

And then fast forward again,

we see from below the 20-day cutting

the 60-day SMA from below.

We're looking at the end of April 2021. So a period of within two months,

so about six weeks on this one. And then just roughly four to five weeks later, so the beginning

of June 2021, we're seeing the 20-day simple moving average approaching the 60-day but it hasn't quite got

there yet or crossed. So looking at the past performance of what happens to the stock when we

get a 20-day crossing a 60-day from above it's reasonable to assume that we'd be sitting around

and waiting for at least a couple of months, possibly three months, for a turnaround in

price momentum to occur to the positive where actually

goes up and we can conclude positive price momentum from the 20 day crossing the 60 day

from below.

And then when we get periods following a 20 day crossing a 60 day from below, we generally

get conditions of anything between one month to five months where the 20 day then crosses

the 60 day from above. So in 2019 and 2020,

we're looking at three to five-month conditions in that situation and in more recent history.

So the end of 2020, beginning of 2021, we're looking at a couple of months, possibly three.

of 2021 we're looking at a couple of months possibly three and just right in the immediate past if we do get a crossover here where the 20-day crosses the 60-day from above then under that

condition the last time it crossed from below to this current condition was only around four to five weeks.

So I guess it's safe to say, other than the violent moves,

which were apparent around the COVID sell-off and then COVID rebound, we're looking at periods here

of around a three-month wait

when price momentum, based on simple moving averages turns negative for it to

then turn positive again, and a wait of around two months for price momentum based on simple moving

averages to turn negative again once it's turned positive. So, as mentioned, we start at around two years

when we're looking at our SMAs.

We get an understanding and appreciation

for price momentum and the lengths of time

it takes in the past for price momentum

to play out based on SMAs.

And then we zoom in to take a closer look.

So here we have our one year chart.

So the past one year for wing.

We don't change anything else except the start date

to look at the last year.

And we keep all of our simple moving averages the same

and we just get a closer look.

So imagine yourself coming into this situation

with perhaps a fundamentally bullish predisposition,

and you're zooming in, zooming down to get more detail

on what could be an advantageous entry point.

Well, in this situation, we just don't know right now whether the 20-day SMA is going to

cross the 60-day SMA from above, but the price momentum does look short-term negative.

versus the medium term.

If we look at the green line,

the medium term looks fairly benign

and the 120-day, the longer term,

looks fairly benign.

But the one year, the 250-day

is definitely in an uptrend,

as is the stock overall,

when we look at the bigger picture of two years.

So on a 20- 60 day time horizon looking

forward, if you were fundamentally bullish in terms of your fundamental predisposition coming into

this situation, you're probably going to conclude that this is an amber situation. Price momentum

could be better, could be displayed better in your favor

in the short term,

but in the medium term, it's benign.

If you've done your fundamental work,

you've got genuine catalysts in place

that you think are going to occur

within the next 20 to 60 days

and price momentum is going to shift

in your favor because of fundamentals then yes

you can have a partial position but short-term price momentum right now we just don't know

if it's going to cross the 60 day from above so the 20 day crossing the 60 day from above

so you would probably get a bit cheeky on your entry

points on your entry price so perhaps looking to buy a partial position say

one-third size position of your ideal maximum size or perhaps even a half

position you could stick a bid in to buy that amount of shares in the low 130s.

You buy your half position and you sit back

and you wait to see what the momentum does.

And also if the catalysts start coming through

and then you can add to your position

on a price momentum turn or a fundamental move

where the catalysts are playing out.

So again, guys, no hard and fast rules here. You saw how we drilled down from the two year to the one year, and we just made some

sensible deductions and came to a sensible conclusion. These are just best behavior practices.

They are not rules.

You're going to have to obviously interpret every situation individually on its own merits.

Now, just as a matter of illustration for process, the next thing you would do is just look at a year to date.

If that's significantly different from a one-year chart.

And you would also look at overall simple moving averages.

SMAs are very useful to us as momentum indicators,

and they should definitely be on your price action or momentum check.

checklist next up is exponential moving averages or EMAs and we look at these two as part of our

price action momentum checklist and we treat them very similarly to simple moving averages

but there is obviously a difference in calculation here between exponential moving averages and simple moving averages.

So as with a lot of trading vernacular,

especially in technical analysis and price action indicators,

the word exponential, it sounds all very cool and exciting,

but it really isn't that cool or exciting.

So if you think back to our very simple formula for simple moving averages,

you'll recall our chosen time horizon, 20 days.

The 20-day SMA is just simply the sum of the closing prices

for the past 20 days divided by 20 days.

However, if you think about how this is calculated,

when we're calculating it, we are sitting on day 21.

So the first day of a 20-day simple moving average is day 21.

And that covers the previous 20 days.

And when we're calculating the 20-day moving average,

it's on a rolling basis. So there's a lag effect of 20 days.

An exponential moving average reduces this lag by applying more weight to recent prices.

And we have a weighting that's applied to the most recent prices. And we have a weighting that's applied to the most recent prices. And this depends

on the number of periods in the moving average itself. So exponential moving averages differ

from simple moving averages in that a given day's EMA calculation depends on the EMAs calculations for all the days prior to that day. Now, similar to

SMAs for significant EMAs, we use the same time periods as with SMAs. So we're using 20, 60, 120,

and 250 days for exponential moving averages.

And we, of course, apply our time frame for long short portfolio managers of 20 to 60 days.

So the formula or calculation

for exponential moving averages

obviously differs from simple moving averages.

The exponential moving average for today

is the closing price of yesterday multiplied by the multiplier plus the exponential moving average calculation of yesterday multiplied by one minus the multiplier.

And the multiplier itself is the number two.

2 divided by the number of observations in the data plus 1.

Okay, so let's run through an example here.

So let's do a 20-day EMA.

So for a 20-day EMA, the multiplier will be calculated as 2 over 21.

So 20 plus 1, and that is equal to 0.0952381. So our multiplier is 0.0952381 for a 20-day exponential

moving average. So let's say a stock closed yesterday at $65.89 and had a 20-day SMA of 62.54. And to get our first EMA data point, we take the 20-day SMA

and multiply that by one minus the multiplier, 0.0952381. And this results in an EMA today of $62.80. Now if on that day the stock then closed at $67.22

we would then use this closing price and the previous day's EMA of the $62.86 to calculate the next days or the current days EMA.

So we take $67.22, multiply that through by the multiplier,

and then we add the previous day's EMA, $62.86,

multiply through by one minus the multiplier,

and then add those results together.

That gives us a new day EMA of $63.27.

And then to continue working out subsequent days

of the exponential moving average,

we keep using yesterday's closing price

and yesterday's EMA to calculate the current day's EMA

subsequently moving forward. Now we do have a download in the download area to

this video where we actually simple moving averages versus exponential moving

averages so the file name there is SMA underscore versus underscore EMA.

And if you look through the spreadsheet there, look through the formulas, this will give you a better understanding of the difference between the two.

So in the example, in the spreadsheet, we've shown a 10-day exponential moving average with 30-day periods. In reality, when you're looking

at obviously much bigger

stock price charts and

data sets, there's

going to be a lot more days.

But the spreadsheet you can

use as a template to further your

understanding of the differences

between SMA and EMA.

And you can also use past stock price data

over even much longer periods

to work out SMA and EMA yourself.

And even compare those results

when you're looking at a particular stock.

And this is all very helpful stuff

to help you better understand it in the first place.

But when you're actually pulling up charts and looking at smas versus emas when you've done the fundamental

groundwork of how the calculations actually work you better understand the visualization of the chart

so unlike most retail traders who pull up moving averages for simple moving averages and exponential moving averages,

and they don't really understand the calculations on what's going on,

you will have a far better understanding of what's actually going on behind the picture or visuals on the screen.

Now, just for reference, a 20-day exponential moving average can also be referred to as the 9.52% EMA. So that's our multiplier, the 0.0952.

And the 10-day exponential moving average can be referred to as the 18.18 per CMA. Multiplier for the 10-day

exponential moving average is 0.1818. So for our time period as long-short portfolio managers over 20, 60 days. We are using 20, 60, 120, and 250-day EMAs.

So for 20 days, we have what's termed as a 9.52% EMA.

For 60 days, a 3.27% EMA.

For 120 days, a 1.65% EMA for 120 days of 1.65% EMA and 250 days a zero spot 79% EMA. Now before we look at examples on a

chart of exponential moving averages we're actually going to look at our fourth momentum

indicator which is moving average convergence divergence.

And this is because the MACD, the moving average convergence divergence calculation,

draws on the exponential moving average data.

So the MACD indicator is what's termed as a momentum oscillator that measures the difference in two EMA periods.

So the MACD is calculated by subtracting the longer-term EMA

from the shorter-term EMA.

And this creates what's called the MACD line.

And the MACD line is the same.

line fluctuates above and below a zero line as the EMAs converge, cross, and diverge from each other.

On top of having the MACD line and the zero line, there's also a third line called the signal line

that's created by taking an EMA of the MACD itself. So the formula that you're always going to bump into,

the default formula for MACD that will typically be the default

on websites and in any software that you download for technical analysis

and price action.

The default formula for MACD is the 12-period EMA minus the 26-period EMA.

So this gives the MACD line, and then a nine-day EMA of the MACD line itself is worked out as the

signal line. So using a 12- and 26-day EMA is the most commonly distributed method of calculation.

And pretty much all retail traders use this method and follow it almost like a religion.

But again, as with so many things in technical analysis and price action indicators, no one ever seems to ask what the significance is of 12, 26, and 9 days.

The only remote or close to significance would be in the Forex markets,

where one week is six days, two weeks is 12 days, and nine days is randomly one and a half weeks.

and nine days is randomly one and a half weeks.

But then again, that kind of leaves us hanging dry when we try to explain what these numbers mean

in terms of their significance

because it just leaves us asking, why 26 days?

What's the significance there?

So even in the Forex markets, there's a bit of randomness there.

These numbers don't really mean much, especially 9 and 26 days.

But in the stock market, we can say with a very high level of confidence that there's

no significance.

They basically mean nothing.

So for us, as longshore portfolio managers in the stock market, for stocks, these periods

just have no significance

so for us our 20 60 120 and 250 day exponential moving averages must be used

to calculate the MACD line and the signal line we calculate as 10 days, so two trading weeks. So our modified MACD has the following

formula. MACD is equal to 20-day EMA minus the 60-day EMA with a 10-day EMA of the MACD as the

signal line. So now we understand how our EMAs and MACD is calculated properly for us as long short portfolio

managers in the stock market. We can have a look at an example here. So here we have a roughly 18 month

chart of the stock CHWY. So we have our daily price data, our open high low close data for daily.

And we have our exponential moving averages calculated here. So we have our 20-day EMA,

our 60-day EMA, our 120-day EMA, and our 250-day EMA. And at the bottom of our chart,

and our 250-day EMA.

And at the bottom of our chart, underneath the price chart,

you can see the formulas for MACD and the signal line.

And there's also another calculation,

the MACD and the signal line.

So the white line is our MACD,

that's the 20-day EMA minus the 60-day EMA, currently at minus 4.9868. So a negative value for the MACD line simply means that the 20-day exponential

moving average must be below the 60-day exponential moving average.

And if you look back, for example,

to the last time the 20-day EMA crossed the 60-day EMA from above,

which you can see on the chart is in March 2021,

this is where the 20- and 60-day MACD line crossed the zero line from above.

So all pretty straightforward stuff. But in terms of vernacular, if the 20 day EMA, we have what is called a positive MACD line.

And if the 20-day EMA is less than or below the 60-day EMA,

we have what is called a negative MACD line.

So in this instance, right now with Chewy, we have a negative for the MACD line.

Now what we also have is our 10 day signal line which remember is an exponential moving

average of the MACD line itself.

And what we can do is as with anything is zoom in to take a closer look.

So if we chart both the MACD line and the signal line,

so we have the MACD line of the 20 and 60 day periods,

and we have the signal line for 10 day EMA of the MACD line,

which is in red, we can visually see when the MACD line crosses the signal line from above and below.

And we can also calculate and chart the differences between the two.

And the difference between the two is actually charted, if we zoom in further, at the zero line.

So if you recall, the zero line is simply on the occasion

when the 20-day EMA minus the 60-day EMA is equal to zero,

so it's when they're crossing.

But the difference between the MACD line and the signal line is also charted across the zero line.

But you have to remember, it's a different calculation.

So don't get confused thinking when you're looking at these green bars,

that the green bars represent the difference between the 20-day EMA and the 60-day EMA,

because they don't.

The green bars, the difference is the difference in value between the MACD line and the signal line.

But it's charted across the zero line.

So now you know how it's calculated and how it works. I guess the big question here

is how do we interpret all of this? Well, we have a 10 point checklist here for EMAs and MACD

as to what it means for your timing appraisal as part of the overall trade idea generation process.

So the first two we've actually covered when we were looking visually at the MACD line.

If the 20-day EMA is greater than the 60-day EMA, we have a positive MACD line in absolute

terms. If the 20-day EMA is less than the 60-day EMA, we have a

negative MACD line in absolute terms. Now when it comes to the MACD line

relative to the signal line, if the difference between the 20-day EMA and the

60-day EMA is greater than the 10-day signal line, we have what is called positive divergence.

And the opposite holds true.

If the difference between the 20-day EMA and the 60-day EMA

is less than the 10-day signal line,

we have what is termed negative divergence.

So we've got two measures here in how we interpret things.

We have the absolute measure and the relative measure.

Now, when it comes to the relative measure,

if the MACD line is moving further away

from the signal line positively,

then it's not going to be a positive measure.

it means that there's positive price divergence and momentum.

And in the opposite, if the MACD line is moving further away from the signal line negatively,

it means that there's negative price divergence and momentum.

And when momentum is starting to fade,

if the MACD line is moving closer to the signal line from the positive,

it means that there's convergence and slowing positive momentum.

And if the MACD line is moving closer to the signal line from the negative,

it means there's convergence and slowing negative momentum.

And on the relative measure, when the MACD line actually converges, so when

the MACD line crosses the signal line from above, there's actually been confirmed convergence,

and there's what's called negative price momentum. And in the opposite, if the MACD line crosses the

signal line from below, there's been confirmed convergence

and there's positive price momentum.

Now, when you're using this checklist

for your timing appraisal,

when it comes to EMAs and MACDs,

the most common price action indicator

that you're going to be using for the MACD

is actually the signal line

crossover from above and below because this is when convergence is actually confirmed. So we have

confirmed positive and negative price action. And the next thing you're going to consider

is the MACD line itself in absolute terms,

and whether that's positive or negative, and where it is in relation to the zero line crossover.

Now, if we go back one slide, and we just look again at the MACD and signal line for Chewy,

how would you actually interpret this? Well, we have a negative

MACD line, as we know. The signal line is also negative. So when we're interpreting this in

absolute terms, the MACD line being negative means there's negative price action overall in the

bigger picture. But on a relative basis, when we compare the MACD line to the signal line,

we've just recently had a crossover of the signal line from below.

So if we think of this in the context of our fundamental predisposition,

and we think of this as the context of our fundamental predisposition and we think of this as a bullish

fundamental predisposition

and we're pulling up the EMAs

and the MACD,

if we go back a further

slide and we look at

the short-term

exponential moving average, which is our 20 days EMA, is currently bouncing along or bouncing off

the long-term EMA, our 250-day one-year exponential moving average. And of course, we can see that the

20-day EMA crossed the 60-day EMA from above back in March.

So overall, negative price action on larger time frames.

So for a medium-term time frame, negative price action.

But on a shorter time frame, we are starting to see less negative momentum and signs of actually positive price action.

So although there's not overall positive price action in the name, what we are seeing is less negative price action and support coming in for the stock around these levels and some signs of positive price momentum or price action. So in terms of our interpretation here, if we go back to our 10

point checklist, we can figure out what's going on here. We have our number two condition,

on here. We have our number two condition, which is the 20-day EMA being less than the 60-day EMA,

so we have a negative MACD line. We have a positive difference, so that's our number three condition. The difference between the 20-day EMA and the 60-day EMA is greater than the signal line, the 10-day signal line, so we have positive divergence.

We also have the MACD line moving from the signal line positively, so this means that there's

positive price divergence again, so there is momentum. So this is our number five condition,

momentum. So this is our number five condition. And in the recent past, we've also had the MACD line crossing the signal line from below. So there's been convergence. So again, positive price momentum.

So on a relative basis, the MACD line versus the signal line, we are seeing positive price action here.

versus the signal line, we are seeing positive price action here.

But from a technical standpoint, from a price action standpoint,

in the bigger picture, the stock is certainly not out of the woods here.

Because for the MACD line, we still have, in absolute terms, a negative.

So if you were coming into this with a fundamental predisposition of bullish, what do you think you'd actually be doing here?

Well, it's certainly not a red light.

It's also not a full position size green light.

It's most probably a partial.

position, an amber signal. You can use your discretion, buy some stock and perhaps sit back

for a few weeks and reassess in a few weeks' time whether you add to the position or not.

Where would you add to the position? Well, you would probably add to the position if the MACD

line went positive. So do use this checklist moving forward. It's very useful for just interpreting things and getting used to the interpretation of EMAs and MACD. Now, as always, when it comes to this stuff, we're more interested in getting the big things right.

big things right. Shorter-term traders will use shorter-term MACD and signal lines and go into a lot of depth and compare the price action of a chart, so the price chart, to the MACD for what

we call divergence signals. We, as long-short portfolio managers in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, we don't need to

go that deep.

Why because we're not generating trade ideas based on price and our time horizon does allow

us to be wrong for at least a week or two or maybe even a month.

All we need to do is get the big things right. So you really don't need to go too far with this and go down rabbit holes and become a victim of the laws of diminishing marginal utility in terms of the work you put in to your timing process.

All we need with technical analysis and price action is the basics and a good understanding of our indicators to time our entry into positions and our exits out of positions better than if we weren't using it. you have to understand about the MACD is that it doesn't provide parameters for either overbought

and oversold conditions. Although visually we can look at the MACD in the past and pinpoint

where stocks were open quotes overbought and open quote oversold and in those conditions, the MACD doesn't

have any upper or lower limits or parameters to constrain its movement.

For example, in very sharp rallies and sell-offs in a stock, the MACD can just continue getting

bigger and smaller. So let's say in a bad situation

for a stock where a

stock fundamentally warns

on their forward-looking EPS

outlook and there's

wholesale selling of the stock

for literally months.

If you as a trader

are staring at the MACD thinking that the negative divergence of the MACD from the signal line simply can't continue because it's at historically wide levels, then you need to think again because it literally can.

it for a company that's aggressively increasing their forward-looking EPS estimates, and there's wholesale accumulation of the stock from, say, pension funds for months on end. You just shouldn't

be staring at the historically wide positive divergence of the MACD line from the signal line and thinking that it's a shorting opportunity.

Because most retail traders don't really bother to do the work on the calculations of their

price action indicators and really understand them, this is why retail traders that get their

trade ideas only from TA and price action patterns and indicators eventually

always get run over.

So they get run over by big fundamental moves and a lack of understanding of both the fundamentals

themselves and the very technical analysis and price action indicators that they espouse. So just understand, guys, how EMA and MACD properly works

and understand the calculations and the interpretations properly.

Now we're going to move on to our final momentum indicator.

We're going to be looking at Heiken Ashi candlestick charts.

So all of the charts that we've looked at up to this point

and that we've used as examples have used regular candlesticks. So we've been using predominantly

daily, open, high, low, and close data. And you'll recall on the charts we've been using, we've had hollow candles for days when

the stock has a closing price above its opening price and filled in candles where we've been using

the color blue when the stock has a closing price below its opening price. However, with the study of price action

and momentum in prices, we can introduce you here

to a new kind of candlestick chart called the Haken Ashi.

And with the Haken Ashi, the candles are worked out differently.

So if we just look at a chart here of the S&P 500 cash index, this is a chart where we're using regular. And you can see visually when we look at a Heiken Ashi that the candles visually look different. And that's because...

the candles are worked out differently.

So the parameters for a Heiken-Ashi candle

versus a regular candle differ

because the calculation for the parameters,

the values for open, high, low, and close are different.

So let's break this down and look at the calculation

and interpret this properly.

So the phrase Heiken Ashi in Japanese, it simply means average bar.

So it all sounds very sophisticated and very fancy. guys, they do like to use a lot of Japanese words to make them sound somehow scientific

or mathematically gifted, implying that they have some sort of edge versus the great unwashed

retail trader, unknowledgeable guy in financial markets.

But as with most things in technical analysis and price action indicators,

it sounds a lot more sophisticated than it actually is.

If they just use the words, for example, average bar in English instead of heikanashi in Japanese,

you would likely be much less impressed.

So when you encounter these names in technical analysis, just translate it back into English

and make it so that in your vocabulary you're using the English phrase as much as the Japanese phrase.

And perhaps even get used to just using the English

phrase all the time. This way you'll be able to concentrate on the calculation and what exactly

the technical analysis or price action indicator is. Glossing it a fancy name and then forgetting what the TA or price action indicator

is actually calculating. So in the case of Heikan Ashi or the average bar,

what are we actually calculating here? Well, the average bar does exactly what it says it does in the name.

Instead of using the straightforward candlestick data for open, high, low, close to form a candle,

the average bar plus the close of the previous bar.

The high data for a candle is the maximum value from the high, open, or close.

And the low value for the data is taken as the minimum value from the same data that's sourced for the high data.

So the minimum value taken from the low, open, or close.

And then the closed data is taken as 0.25 of the sum of the open plus the high plus the low plus the close.

So you can see here where the OHLC data for average bars or heikonashi differs versus regular candles.

So the high and low data is not simply the high or low for that asset in that time period,

whether we're looking at hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly candles.

The high and low data is taken as the maximum for the high

of the high, open, and closed data,

and the low is taken as the minimum, so the lowest point of the

low open and close.

Then when it comes to the open and closed data, they are both worked out as averages.

So the open data of the next candle is just the open of the previous bar plus the close

of the previous bar divided by two.

Then the close of the current bar is the open of the current bar plus the high, low, and close of the current bar divided by four.

So both the open and the close, the data that is sourced is then averaged.

But you can see that the open of a new candle,

the data that's being sourced and averaged

is data from the previous candle.

And it's referencing the previous open as well.

So what the average bar or hei canashi achieves is a smoother result for the candles because all previous days that are

referenced are average bars too now also remember that the average bars stay hollow during a predominant uptrend

and they're filled in during a predominant downtrend.

And when we analyze average bars or Haken Ashi charts

in terms of price action,

it tells us what the dominant trend is.

Whereas the normal OHLC representation displays or shows us a variation in the candles

within a predominant uptrend or downtrend. So the Heiken Ashi average bar analysis is very useful to

to us in terms of helping us with our timing for entry and exits.

In the context of the 20 to 60 day time horizon, it's useful to start by looking at weekly data.

So we can see here with an example of XPEL, imagine you are coming into this stock with a fundamental predisposition of bullish

in March 2021. So if you look at the weekly candle on the chart at the beginning of March 2021,

you can see that there's a big variation there in the data. The range of that candle,

in the data. The range of that candle, the high and the low, is $60 for the high.

And by just visualizing here, it's probably around $45 for the low.

But what you would notice in the history of this stock price using average bars is that when we use weekly data here we can see

that there's only periods of one two or three weeks with the exception of

February and March 2020 there's only periods of one two or three weeks where

there's a predominant downtrend so this can certainly help us with our timing

if we're coming into this stock

with a fundamental predisposition of bullish.

So if we can accumulate in the second or fourth downtrend,

the odds based on historical analysis of average bars

are probably in our favor.

And then we can move on to the daily data for XPEL, and we can take a look at what happens in these periods of predominant downtrend

that only seem to last for one, two, or three weeks. So if we're sitting around the beginning of March, around that time, and we look at previous daily data where we have predominant downtrends, the downtrends seem to last only a week or two, and we have moves down of around $10 a share.

So if you were coming into this stock with a fundamental predisposition of bullish

around the beginning or middle of March,

what would you be doing?

You'd probably be holding out for purchases of stock,

certainly in the low 50s, if not at $50.

And if you've got a strong fundamental view

based on solid fundamental analysis, and it's backed up, if not at $50. And if you've got a strong fundamental view

based on solid fundamental analysis

and it's backed up in the technicals

and price action of the stock,

you'd feel fairly comfortable

about accumulating stock here in the low 50s.

Then as the trade develops and turns into a winning position,

we get our positive price action.

So a positive upward trend of the average bars into April,

reaching the mid-60s by the beginning of May.

And then we have a downtrend,

which could actually present an opportunity for us to pick spots and add to this winning trade.

And if we look back at the weekly data and we look at the areas on the chart where we have a predominantly positive uptrend in the average bars, the average bars tend to last between five and 10 weeks.

So this type of understanding of the data and the trends in terms of time horizon can actually help

us with our exit. And in all probability, we'd be looking to probably exit the position around week 10.

the position around week 10.

So it wouldn't be too much of a stretch to say that given the predominant uptrend

and our time horizon of 20 to 60 days,

we probably would have exited this trade

based on our fundamental analysis,

our catalysts, our timing,

somewhere in the high $70 to $80 range

after getting in in the low 50s.

Now, of course, there's multiple other examples

of average bars, Heiken Ashi analysis.

Again, with this stock, Teneco,

we're using weekly data first, understanding what happens

during predominant uptrends and downtrends, and adjusting our timing appraisal accordingly.

We then move to daily data, and that helps us pinpoint better entries and exits.

us pinpoint better entries and exits.

Even when we're looking on the short side, not just on the long side,

Heiken Ashi average bars obviously can help us as well

for short entries.

So here we have TAN, TAN, the solar ETF in the United States.

And if we're coming into this situation

with a fundamental predisposition

of short, this is obviously at a sector level and we would probably much rather be short

one of the biggest holdings of the ETF but we can see at the sector level the average

bar analysis can help us on short entries not just for the sector

but also for holdings within that etf so for single stocks in the etf look at getting uh

really accurate by looking at the daily data in the bigger picture

and then zooming in into the much shorter term picture.

And what we're trying to do here is pinpoint shorts

when positive predominant trends in the average bars

have been exhausted

and they're turning into predominant negative trends.

And then we're probably looking to cover shorts

when we have predominant negative trends that are becoming exhausted and they're turning into short-term positive Heiken Ashi or average bar trends.

shorts and think back and remember our short waves of phase one, phase two, phase three,

phase four, and phase five, Heikan Ashi average bars can really help us with our timing in terms of phases or shorts.

So another example on the short side here, Beyond Meat, B-Y-N-D,

where we can analyze the daily average bars,

daily Heiken Ashi,

and understand what happens from a timing perspective when we get reversals into the positive trends

and how long they last.

And we can pick our spots,

obviously married up with the fundamental analysis.

We can pick our spots and enter short

positions at better times. If we look at another example here with Uber, imagine yourself coming

into a situation here in May, middle of May 2021, with a fundamental predisposition of bearish.

You see the stock breaking a significant support level.

Then the predominant negative trend becomes exhausted around $45,

turning into a positive trend.

But you know from past data that the positive trend

is probably only going to last around 10 trading days

before turning back into a predominantly negative trend.

You will be holding off, hanging back,

and waiting to get better prices on your short,

probably around $50.

And then perhaps adding to the short on a break to the

downside. Average bars can also help us with ranging stocks as well. So here on the screen,

we have ALK, Alaska Airlines. If we were coming into this stock with perhaps a fundamental bearish predisposition post the COVID-19 recovery rally,

and then we see the stock ranging on the average bar analysis,

we can obviously zoom in and attempt to pinpoint our impact.

entry prices and we're probably looking to get something on on the short side given our

fundamental predisposition and our timing appraisal of the average bars. We're probably looking

to get something on around $70 or if we can a little bit higher and then add to it on a

break to the downside. So use the average bar analysis. Obviously, there's multiple examples out there in the market.

Go and look at them yourself and start trying to figure out predominant uptrends and downtrends and how long they actually last.

So when they get exhausted and when there's turning points in the overall predominant trend to the upside or downside.

So for price action analysis, the Heiken Ashi candlestick charts help us to identify dominant trends.

So it basically acts as a price action head check for us versus regular candlestick charts where we might actually get

some false signals when we're considering both entry and exits. Use the Heiken Ashi average bar

analysis in conjunction with the other price action and momentum indicators mentioned in this video like the RSI, simple moving averages,

exponential moving averages and MACD. Use it in conjunction with them to get an overall picture

of price momentum. Now let's tie all of this up together for our timing appraisal with both

technical analysis and price action. Remember from the previous video when we discussed technical analysis and incorrect timing?

Well, when we're using technical analysis and price action indicators in conjunction with

each other, the same mindset applies.

We are 20 to 60- predominantly fundamental long short portfolio managers.

We use both technical analysis and price action indicators for timing only.

In your overall trade idea generation process, if you get to the TA and PA stage and think the timing is wrong, that's totally fine. Just sit back and wait.

Stick it on the watch list and just wait for a better entry. And if you're already in a position

and the technical analysis and price action indicators keep confirming that your fundamental

view is correct and it's a winner it's a winning position

you're probably going to let the position run and if you're already in a position and both the

technicals and the price action indicators keep denying your fundamental view and you've

got a losing position, you're probably going to do best to cut the position.

Now, you have to remember that when we're using both technical analysis and price action

indicators, we don't require perfect timing.

If you've got a strong fundamental view and it's backed up by solid fundamental analysis and catalysts and the TA and the PA indicators

are lined up pretty well. It doesn't have to be perfect. It's probably a green light.

Remember, at the end of the day, we are traders and we're trying to predict the future and we're not

reacting to current price. We're trying to predict that in the next 20 to 60

days things will go in our favor. However, we are not stubborn beings. Stocks will do whatever they

want to do and we can't influence the price. So we don't fight the technical analysis and the price action of a stock. And we certainly

don't engage in stubborn behavior. We always try to seek to get a position on within 20 days.

But if it's not right to do so, obviously we do not fight it. Now, when it comes to timing, we can, of course, become more agnostic about timing our positions.

This is preventative risk management in itself.

So how do we do this?

Well, we can scale into longs and shorts.

And this is referring to taking partial positions before we put on full positions.

And we use technical analysis and price action in this way to make our executions better and more optimal.

Therefore, we are by default engaging in preventative risk management.

risk management. However, in a well-diversified long-short portfolio, this obviously requires trading accounts that are larger. And by the way, scaling not just into longs and shorts,

but also out of positions applies here as well. We can use technical analysis and price action

indicators to help us scale out of longs

and shorts for our exits. Now of course we do have choices here we can also

totally forget altogether about TA and PA and just put trades on immediately not

caring about it at all.

However, we definitely would not recommend this.

Because we are long-short portfolio managers within the 20 to 60-day time horizon,

our timing is important.

We are trading the stock price

around catalysts within that time horizon.

So we are not investors.

We're trading in the 20 to 60 day time horizon

and our timing really does matter.

From what we've looked at in the last few videos,

when it comes to TA and PA,

you can obviously see from the examples

that we've been through,

you can add a lot of value with your timing.

However, we can become more agnostic where our timing becomes less important, i.e. trying to buy at or near the lows and trying to sell at or near highs.

And this comes with a change in trade structure.

So we can utilize options structures to become more agnostic in our timing.

And there are multiple option structures that allow you to become more agnostic with your timing

and therefore place less importance on technical analysis and price action indicators.

importance on technical analysis and price action indicators.

However, this is well beyond the scope of this video series, the PTM video series, and it can only really be covered in mentoring programs where you're trading with real money under

the supervision of an ITPM professional trading mentor.

professional trading mental.

But if you're comfortable with long, short stock portfolios and you're going to be engaging in technical analysis

and price action appraisal in terms of timing,

just remember TA and PA are not exact sciences.

Like the discipline of trading overall,

they are artistic sciences and used correctly,

they can definitely add value over many trades over a long period of time as part of your overall

trade idea generation process. Just don't use TA and PA to generate trade idea. That, ladies and gentlemen, is a game for fools.

Okay, so that brings us to the end of our timing section of the PTM video series.

Let's hop in to the next video and go to the desk for a recap and a rundown.