Okay, so that was building permits, a really useful leading indicator in the United States,

obviously for traders predicting stock market direction, GDP growth direction, and our portfolio

bias. So as a number, you will have seen it has far-reaching implications for the wider US economy

because it tells us so many things that are going on in the US economy at any one moment in time,

all embedded in one number. So again, like other indicators, guys, go through the data and get it every month. Go through it. Be on top of it.

Understand it and interpret it correctly. OK. You'll not only get a very good idea of what's

going on in the U.S. economy, but you'll also get a really good insight, a really good take for your

portfolio bias. And you'll also potentially get a lot of trade

ideas from it too. So now we're going to continue building out our macroeconomic dashboard,

and we're going to be looking at small business in the US. So the business surveys that we've looked at

so far, we've really been focusing on big business and corporations

in the US. Okay. If we want to get a full picture of what's going on in the economy,

we can't only focus on big business and corporations. We also have to bring in to our

analysis, the small business sector, because it's very large and it's very important to the US economy.

So what we're going to be doing is looking at a data set called the NFIB Small Business

Optimism Index. And with this data, which comes out on a monthly basis, we get an insight into

the health of a large part of the US economy, that being the small business

sector. Also, we can create our own indices from this data. So we can take the subcomponents

of the data set, and we can create our own indices to get a clearer picture of what's going on in the US economy. So we're going to introduce you now

to the ITPM NFIB SBO leading index. Now, of course, that's a mouthful, but don't worry,

it's all going to become clear. So again, we have a download for this video. Go to the downloads area

and you'll see that. Navigate to the downloads area and you'll see all the data sets

and see how everything fits together. You will be using this again

as a template on a monthly basis in conjunction

with all of the other data sets that you update on a monthly basis.

monthly basis for your leading indicator suite, your macroeconomic dashboard. So after this video,

we're going to jump straight in actually to the next video, which will be cyclical commodity

prices in video number 12. So let's get into this video and I'll see you back at the desk at the end

of video number 12.

desk at the end of video number 12.

Okay, so welcome to video number 11. We're going to be looking at now small businesses in the United States. So we're going to be looking at our seventh leading indicator, the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index. So how does this fit in

to our list of leading indicators that we've covered so far? Well, we have our money market leading

indicators in the government bond and corporate bond markets. And we have our money supply accessory.

We also have our stock market volatility,

our multiple surveys,

and the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index

is one of those surveys.

So we're adding the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index

to our surveys list.

So what is it? What is the NFIB, Small Business Optimism Index?

Well, the NFIB is the National Federation of Independent Business. It's the largest small

business trade association in the United States. And there's a monthly assessment that's reported by the NFIB. It's

called the Small Business Economic Trends Report. And it's a monthly assessment of US small business

activity. So the US small business economy and its near term prospects. The data is collected through mail surveys

from random samples of the NFIB membership and the data is reported on

the second Tuesday of each month for the previous month. So the Small Business

Optimism Index, which is what we're interested in, is a composite of 10

small business economic trends, so SBET indicators, that provide monthly summary

data for the state of the small business economy in the US. Now, the Small

Business Optimism Index is actually classed by economists as a coincident

indicator.

So, the Aggregate Index, the Small Business Optimism Index, is classed by economists as

a coincident indicator because it tells us, on average,

what is going on right now in the small business part of the US economy.

However, as traders and portfolio managers, what are we interested in?

Well, we are interested in indicators that lead the economy.

We're not really that interested in coincidence or lagging indicators.

There's 10 sub-components of the Small Business Optimism Index.

sub-components of the Small Business Optimism Index. And there's leading indicators within these 10 SVET indicators that traders and PMs focus on. So we're going to be looking at the aggregate

index, but also the important leading indicators that are components of the overall index.

that are components of the overall index. Now, why in the world would we care or even want to look at small businesses in the US?

Why is small business important to us? Well, small businesses in the US account for roughly 50% of gross domestic product in the US.

And in terms of employees, 50% of all US private sector employees work for small businesses.

And that's defined as having 500 employees or less.

So 500 employees or less, we can look at the workforce

that makes up that 50% and the

composition of the size of these businesses by employees hired.

So, for example, businesses that have 100 to 499 employees, this is 15% of the workforce

in the US.

20 to 99 employees, that's 17% of the workforce.

5 to 19 employees, that's 13% of the workforce.

And 1 to 4 employees, so very small businesses, that's 5% of the workforce.

So this makes up, in total, 50% of employees in the private sector.

And if we look at registered businesses in the United States, there's 29 million registered firms in the US.

And over 99% of those registered companies are classed as small businesses.

So having fewer than 500 employees.

And when we look at it and break it down, the vast majority, so 88% of the 29 million registered firms, have fewer than 20 employees.

registered firms have fewer than 20 employees. Now, when we look at it from a revenue perspective,

in terms of the size of these businesses by revenue,

in terms of revenue amongst small business,

the following approximate distribution

applies as of 2020.

So companies that have under $100,000 in revenue,

that's the majority, that's 40% of small businesses.

Companies that have $100,000 to $500,000 in revenue,

that's 30%.

So we have 70% of businesses making under 500K in revenue. 500K to 5 million in revenue, that's around a

quarter of businesses. And then 5 million to 50 million revenue, that's around 5%. So that's in

the minority. So taken together, you can see why it's very important when we're trying to get a handle as traders and portfolio managers on the future expectation of direction of GDP growth, the level of GDP growth, and potentially direction of the stock market and the return of the stock market.

of the stock market and the return of the stock market, it's very important for us as traders and PMs that we don't ignore small business in the United States.

In fact, we shouldn't be ignoring it.

We should be embracing it and trying to figure out what is happening in the small business

sector in the US.

Of course we should.

Why?

Because it's very important. If we just look

at it on a GDP level, it's 50% of US GDP is accounted for by small business. 50% from an employee

perspective, 50% of all private sector employees are from small business.

And in terms of revenue, if we think about it from the level of revenue perspective and the types of businesses that are driving this contribution to US GDP.

So the 50% contribution to US GDP and the 50% contribution to private sector employees.

If we think about it from a revenue perspective, what types of businesses are driving that

contribution? Well, 70% of small businesses are making less than 500K revenue in a year.

are making less than 500K revenue in a year.

And from the 5 million level, if we include that,

it's 95% of small businesses are making less than 5 million revenue per year.

So it's these businesses

that are making the significant contribution

to the 50% of US GDP and the 50% of US GDP

and the 50% of US private sector employment.

So it's pretty obvious that as traders

and portfolio managers, we need to be concentrating a lot

on what is going on in the small business sector in the US.

So let's think about this a little deeper in terms of the importance of small business

in the US.

If 50% of all private sector employees in the US are working for companies that have 500

employees or less, then 50% are working for big business in the private sector. If small business accounts for 50% of GDP share,

then big business and government and public spending

accounts for 50%.

So it therefore stands to reason that small business

is just as important, if not more important,

than big business in determining US GDP growth and S&P 500 direction. And of course,

the private sector way more important than government. Now, similar to survey indicators

that we've looked at so far in the PTM video series. There's optimistic conditions

and there's pessimistic conditions.

Okay.

And we get responses in surveys

that are leading towards optimism and pessimism.

And it's no different in the small business sector.

We look at it in the same way.

So as small businesses grow more optimistic about the future,

they are getting more bullish about the future and vice versa. If they become more pessimistic,

they're becoming more bearish on the future. So when they get more optimistic, they plan to hire

more people, invest more money in the business to grow it, increase inventories and potentially plan to raise prices for goods and services.

When they get more pessimistic, they plan to lay off more people.

They plan to cut back on business investment and take risks and decrease inventories or hold lower levels of inventories

in order to stay nimble and cautious,

and they tend to hold prices steady or plan to cut prices to maintain revenue levels.

Now, if you think back to previous leading indicators that we've looked at,

previous leading indicators that we've looked at, when we looked at components of those leading indicators. So if you think back to the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business and the ISM

Services Report on Business, so the Non-Manufacturing Report on Business, if you recall,

we looked at components within the aggregate index. So the components

that make up the aggregate indices. And if you remember, in ISM manufacturing, we looked

at new orders as being the most important. In the ISM services or non-

manufacturing, we looked at business activity and new orders as the most

important components and leading indicators within the composite index. And the leading

components of the NFIB can be used in exactly the same way and can be used in conjunction

with these leading indicators to get a better understanding of the future economy.

Now, if you go to the downloads area underneath the video,

you'll see three spreadsheet files in the downloads area

that have been taken from the URL that's on the screen now, nfib-sbet.org. You can get all the data sets from that website.

But we have organized the data sets into a much easier digestible format. And you can download

these three spreadsheet files and start looking at the data

and looking at the visuals, the charts, and begin to really understand how the NFIB Small Business

Optimism Index works. And it's split into three parts. We have components, we have regions in the United States, and we have it split up by industry.

And of course, every month, you can get the data yourself when the data is released, and you can

update your spreadsheets to keep them updated in your folders. Now, later in the video, we are gonna be going through the most important areas of the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index.

So we'll be covering that off for you.

But let's have a look first at the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index survey design.

How is it actually designed? So each month, the NFIB sends out what is called

the Small Business Economic Trends Survey, the SBET survey. And there's 10 equally weighted,

seasonally adjusted variables, which are essentially questions, and then the responses are taken

to make up the small business optimism composite index,

which is the coincident index,

or considered to be coincident,

because it's telling us overall

what's going on right now in the economy,

not necessarily leading at the composite level.

So these 10 questions make up the 10 components

and the responses contribute proportionately 10% each

to the overall monthly change in the index.

So let's have a look at these areas.

that small businesses are surveyed on each month.

Firstly, do you have any plans to increase employment?

Is now a good time to expand?

What are your plans to increase inventories?

Do you expect the economy to improve?

Are you expecting real sales to go higher?

What is current inventory?

Is that up or down versus the last month?

What are current job openings up or down versus last month? What are your expected

conditions for the future of the credit market? Do you have any plans to make capital outlays?

And what are you seeing in earnings trends up or down versus

last month? Now, when you look at these questions, I'm going to leave it to you to decide for

a short period of time. We will cover it a little bit later in the video, but I'll leave

it to you to decide for the moment what you think would be a leading indicator and what

you think would be a coincident

indicator. So stew on that for a while, have a think about it. Let's put it this way. There's some

clues in the words that are used in the questions. But let's have a look at the NFIB Small Business

Optimism Index, where it is actually located in terms of the survey design, what you'll actually see each

month when it comes out. So the data goes back to January 1986. And what we've got on the screen

here is the January 2021 report. And you can see the chart of all data. And in January 1986, the index was indexed to a level of 100.

And you can see at the bottom of the screen, the overall small business optimism index is down for the month.

And it's at 95.7.

So that's the composite number.

And then you can see the 10 components being reported in the survey.

So we see the plans to increase employment down 16%.

Plans to make capital outlays down 22%.

Plans to increase inventories down 3%.

Expecting the economy to improve, down 16.

Expecting real sales to go higher, down 4.

Current inventory, current inventory, the only one that's going up.

Current job openings, down 32%.

Expected credit conditions down 5%, is now a good time to expand down 8% and earnings trends

minus 14%. So you can see the display that you would get each month firstly, but also,

you know, this particular report, you can see that it's pretty much

pretty much all down except the current levels of inventory.

So this is what you'll see each month

when you go to do your data collection.

And you just have to collect the data

and update your spreadsheets.

The actual sub-indices, so the 10 components,

each individual one, the survey is designed differently.

That's out of the scope of this video and out of the scope of the PTM video series to cover

each individual survey design for each of the components.

Obviously, if you wanted to do further work on that, you can do.

Be our guest and go and figure out how each of those surveys is designed.

But you can actually go on the website here and you can get the actual SBET questionnaire.

And you can download it and do further work on that as well.

Now, if you want to go and collect all data yourself or update

spreadsheets on a monthly basis, you just need to go to the NFIB website. You can

see on the left-hand side here there's a list of filters and the one you need is

the one for indicators and you need to select the monthly frequency

and seasonally adjusted numbers.

So make sure that box is ticked for seasonal adjustment.

And then in the center of the screen,

on the right-hand side of the filters,

you can see that there's a dropdown

for selecting indicators.

And the one we've got on the screen here

is the composite number small business optimism and

in that drop down you can also get the indicators for the sub components as well so uh when you're

doing this to get all historical data if you want to go through the whole exercise yourself

this is where you get the data and you just click on download data and it drops into Excel and you get a download or if you're doing it on a monthly basis just to

update your data this is where you would go to get it. Now just as a failsafe for

monthly data collection for your own monthly processes. The historical data is available on the NFIB website, so in the

indicators section, and it is available in Excel format, but it is sometimes delayed. So

there are alternative ways of getting the data. At the time of recording, investing.com

in their economic calendar for NFIB,

small business optimism.

The entire historical data set is there and it's up to date,

but that's at the time of recording.

The only way to get all of the data from Investing.com

investing.com is actually manually doing it.

There's no automatic download into Excel.

So you have to do that by copying and pasting the data.

But do bear in mind that this data at investing.com is only for the composite index.

It doesn't include the components, the 10 components that we've looked at.

But this brings up another point, guys, as well.

You know, at the time of recording, throughout the PTM video series,

we are pointing you to sources that at the time of recording,

have data sets and information that are useful for leading indicators

and other areas of the process that we're going to be looking at

later in the PTM video series. And of course, over time, sources can change. So the best thing you can

do is go hunting for them by yourself. You need to be self-reliant. You need to practice looking for

data and information using keywords in Google and going hunting for

information yourself. So if in the future, for example, with the NFIB data, it's not

available at investing.com, well you just use some keywords and you type into

Google and you go searching for the data elsewhere if you want to get a more

timely data release.

So we're back here to one of the most important

ITPM principles of self-sustainability.

You have to be able to do this all yourself, forever.

You know, if you're going to be a professional

standard trader, you can't be running around the internet

asking people what sources they got their information from.

You have to be able to go and do that yourself.

That means you're totally self-sustainable.

But anyway, let's continue with the NFIB

and let's have a look at the breakdown

of both leading and coincident components

that make up the composite index

for the small business index.

Well, if you were thinking earlier,

when I asked you to think about

what were the leading and coincident components,

that language like plans and expectations

were the key words to leading components, then you'd be right. So the leading components, plans to increase employment, expansion plans, plans to increase inventories,

expecting the economy to improve, expecting real sales to go higher.

expecting real sales to go higher. Now we as a company at ITPM isolate those five as leading components,

because we believe they are the most useful in terms of,

from a trading and portfolio management perspective,

in terms of creating your own leading index.

So yes, you can take the data

and create your own leading index.

If you look at the Coincident Components,

you'll see that there is a small overlap

in terms of definition for leading and coincident.

So you can see, for example, we have current inventory,

we have current job openings and earnings trends,

which are definitely coincident indicators. But we also have arguably some leading indicators

there, expected credit conditions and plans to make capital outlays. We as a company isolate

five of them. So plans to increase employment, expansion plans, plans to increase inventories, the

expectation of economic improvement and expectation of real sales to go higher.

We isolate those five and we create our own leading index with 20% weightings. You can, if you want, very obviously take expected credit

conditions and plans to make capital outlays, and you can play around with the data and create

your own leading components. If you put six or seven into your bespoke leading indicator index, that's fine.

You can do that.

But we believe it's more useful to narrow it down slightly to have five with a 20% weighting

or contribution of each component to the overall bespoke leading index that we create ourselves.

And why?

Well, if you think about, for example, when you look at our leading components,

and you look at number two, expansion plans.

Well, if you think about number eight and nine, expected credit conditions,

and plans to make capital outlays, there's an overlap there.

Because if a business has expansion plans, yes, they will take on more credit if they're

bullish about credit conditions, and they will make more capital outlays.

So we just isolate expansion plans and isolate in total five leading components. Now, if you go to the downloads area

where we have the three spreadsheets,

you'll see the small business composite index chart

inside the files there.

And you can see visually

what the entire time series has done.

And on this chart, we've got the blue line,

which is the Small Business Optimism Index,

going right back to 1986.

And we also have a white line,

which is the four-month moving average of that data.

And we highlight on the screen the 100 level, which is the original index level.

And we can compare this to GDP growth.

And look at the number, look at the time series relative to GDP growth, and look at business

cycle history and put into context what was going on at the time. So for example,

if you look at the early to mid 2000s, that was obviously a very, very bullish high point

for a small business in the United States. And then we started to go below the 100 level

in 2006-7. And then below the 100 level, we continued to keep going lower,

and then we got negative GDP growth. And we also had a slowdown as well going into that condition.

Coming out of the global financial crisis, 2010-11-12-13, you can see the index level is still in the low 90s for small business.

And small business was still really struggling.

And it doesn't really get up to the 100 level until around 2015, briefly.

And then it goes lower again, again to the low 90s.

So we're getting lower levels of GDP growth

associated with those numbers.

And small business optimism is below the 100 level.

And then we see in 2016,

something happened at the end of 2016

where small business optimism just takes off.

Well, we'll be covering that a bit later in the video,

but it's pretty obvious when you look at the screen and you look at business cycle history

that levels or periods of strong positive GDP growth are associated with the NFIB Small Business

Optimism Index being above the 100 level. Whenever it goes below the 100 level, it's a warning sign

for a slowdown in GDP growth. And definitely when it's in the low 90s, we're going to get very,

very slow GDP growth or even contraction. When we look at the data and compare it to the S&P 500 year-on-year percentage change, and we just visually look above and below the 100 level, if we look above the 100 level, through our history, when we have the small business optimism index above 100, we should be expecting pretty

strong or very strong S&P 500 year on year percentage returns.

And of course, there's no rule book here, guys, where we say,

If the index is at 102.5, what should we expect?

But we can see visually that we should be expecting around 20% or above.

But again, this can change in the future.

It's not a rule book.

If you look at above the 100 level, generally speaking, we're looking at 15% or above when the index is printing consistently above the 100 level.

And if we look below the 100 level and we look to around the 95 level, between 95 and 100, we're looking at decent returns in the S&P 500 on a year-on-year basis.

We should be expecting anything between flat and 15%.

And then as we get to 95% or below, what should we be expecting?

Well, through our history, we should be expecting flat GDP growth or even contraction in GDP growth.

And we get associated with that negative S&P 500 year-on-year percentage returns.

Now, don't forget, we are looking at the aggregate index here,

which is made up of both leading and coincident components.

And this is why economists tend to view

the Aggregate Composite Small Business Optimism Index

as defined as a coincident indicator.

But it does have leading components. as defined as a coincident indicator,

but it does have leading components.

So arguably, because of these leading components,

there is a lead into GDP growth

and a lead into S&P 500 direction and returns.

But of course, as traders and portfolio managers,

we've got money on the line and we want to do a bit more digging and do a bit more further work.

And we can actually strip out, as I mentioned earlier, we can strip out the main leading components.

And there's five of them and we can create our own leading index. So, as mentioned earlier, we take out the plans to increase employment, expansion plans,

plans to increase inventories, expectation for the economy to improve, and expected real

sales to go higher.

and expected real sales to go higher. And each of these receives an equal 20% weighting in our bespoke leading index for the leading components of the Small Business Optimism Index. So we've created

our own index. It's going to be useful for you to go into the downloads area and have a look at that.

And have a look at the formulas in the Excel sheet as well. Learn how the index works and you can play

around with it if you want. You can take out expansion plans, you can replace it with capital

outlays. You can play around with it and just figure out how it works and the mechanics of the data in the spreadsheet.

And the way it's been formatted in the sheet

is in the same way as the composite coincident index

that we just looked at,

where we have the SBO leading index in blue.

In white, we have the four-month moving average of that data,

and we've compared it to both GDP growth and also S&P 500 direction and returns.

So, the five areas that we've taken for this leading index, our bespoke index, plans to increase employment.

Now is a good time to expand or not.

Plans to increase inventories.

Your expectation of the economy to improve.

And your expectation of real sales to improve.

your expectation of real sales to improve.

Now, as mentioned previously,

each of these component surveys,

their design is all slightly different.

And you can see on the scale,

on the left-hand side of these charts,

that the measurements are different for each of the 10 components.

And yeah, these surveys are designed individually, but the overall contribution to the overall

index for the NFIB small business index,osite Index, each of these is 10%.

And for our Leading Index, it's 20%.

And you can go into the spreadsheet, look at the formulas of how everything is worked out for the Leading Bespoke Index.

It's all very straightforward.

We're essentially adding up the five isolated components,

so the five leading indicators,

and we're adding them up and just working out a simple average,

so an average, a mean number for those five leading components.

And that number is the ITPM SBO leading index. Now, we mentioned

earlier that you can look at the NFIB SBO data on a regional basis in the download

area, you'll also get regional data for US small business optimism. It's really

important to keep an eye on this data, especially when you're looking at the

largest contributor regions overall to US GDP. And you can see here from the

2019 GDP data, which is split up by billions of dollars by state.

California, Texas, and New York, and arguably Florida as well.

But California, Texas, and New York, by far the biggest contributors on a state basis to

U.S. GDP.

The NFIB splits everything up into regions. You'll find California in the Pacific

region as defined by the NFIB. You'll find Texas in the West South Central region as defined by the NFIB and you'll find New York State in the Northeast region as defined by the NFB.

Additionally, in the downloads area, you're also going to find industry data for US small business

optimism. And this industry data and the trends that come from it can be useful when you're using it in conjunction

with the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business industry data and the ISM Services industry

data when you're looking for particular industry trends in order to locate single stock trade

ideas. Now, if you recall, with the ISM manufacturing and ISM services,

there were industry stats that were published every month by the ISM for the sectors.

ISM Manufacturing and ISM Services also showed for each industry sector, they showed the trend in months and they were calculated for you.

The problem with the SBO data is that that job is not done for you. They don't calculate the industry trend in terms of months. You have to do

that yourself manually. So if you recall the ISM manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors,

you see them on the screen there. You can see we have the number of months in growth

or contraction.

The SBO data doesn't provide that.

You would have to do that manually yourself.

Now, when using all of this together,

when you're doing a quantitative assessment,

doing your monthly updates on an industry

level. You can use obviously the SVO industry data together with the ISM manufacturing and ISM non-manufacturing, so services data. Use it together and look for clues and trends and turning points in particular sectors.

particular sectors. Now, let's revert to our useful exercise of having a look at this particular leading indicator, the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index. So, that's the coincident indicator

as defined by economists, but we know there's leading components to it. So arguably, there is a leading element to it.

Let's have a look at it in recent business cycle history.

What we've got on the screen here is the period from January 16 to January 19.

And this period, if we look in particular from May 16 to August 18 within that three-year period, you can see on the right-hand

side I've denoted some pretty important historical moments that were important for small

business. And it was basically at the beginning, if you look at May 16,

when Trump received the Republican nomination for president.

And if we fast forward to November 16,

that was when Trump had his election win.

And you can see small business optimism

starting to increase. So in May, it was 93.8. And when Trump

won the presidency, it was 98.4. And then in January 17, when we had the Trump inauguration,

between November 16 and Jan 17, there was that big jump that we looked at earlier on the chart

of the Small Business Optimism Index from 98.4 to 105.9.

Fast forward again to November 17, small business optimism sitting at a very high level

of 107.1, and that's when the corporate tax cuts that Trump was running on actually went into effect.

So the corporate tax cut of 35% to 21%. So you can see that the small business optimism index,

after the Trump win, rallied hard, and then rallied all the way up, up until the corporate tax cut,

and actually peaked in August 2018. And if you remember, what do we recall about August 2018?

Yes, that was when the ISM

peaked as well, the ISM Manufacturing Index. Now, of course, we're not going to get into political

debates here in the PTM video series. We are all about trading and portfolio management and what

these leading indicators mean for the economy and what it means for our portfolios and our pocket.

Very obviously, a corporate tax cut from 35% to 21% alleviates a massive headwind for small business.

And the Trump presidency was very, very good for small business.

If we look on the chart here, I've highlighted areas in the past when the small Business Optimism Index was above 100. And I've also highlighted the period where Trump received the nomination, the

Republican nomination for president, which was May 2016. You can see during

pretty much all of the Obama years, the small business optimism index was below 100.

And Trump receiving the nomination, the Republican nomination for president occurs in May 2016.

And then in November 16, it takes off after the election win on the expectation of better small business conditions from small

business owners because they were expecting the corporate tax rate to be cut.

Then we get to the peak there in August 2018 of around 108 on the Small Business Optimism Index.

on the Small Business Optimism Index.

And if you recall from previous videos,

we covered that period, August 18 to August 2019.

This was when the yield curve was flattening and eventually briefly inverting

until the Fed lowered rates in July, September, October 19.

And we previously showed you the UMCSI during that period never actually entered into a

consumer recession or went into consumer recession territory during that period. And actually, the

Small Business Optimism Index never went below 100 during that period either. So the period August 2018 to August 2019. And that

was due, obviously, to overall low record interest rates. But of course, it's because of the low

interest rates, and also because the corporate tax rate was lowered. So if we think about all of our leading indicators and filling in the colour for this picture

over this time period, the period of economic stress during the period August 18 to August 19 was

more of a global manufacturing, big business trade slowdown, not because of the US small business

sector and the US consumer. And again, this is a clear example of why you need to be a student

of business cycle history and understand what was going on with each of the leading indicators

and each part of the US economy at certain moments in time.

So it's important to follow all the numbers and interpret them properly so you can really understand the picture in the US and global economy in the future

when you're doing your monthly processes and trying to understand

the macroeconomic picture of the world and what you expect in the future.

macroeconomic picture of the world and what you expect in the future.

So let's summarize here for the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index.

We can go and get the data.

It's publicly available.

It's free information. You just have to be diligent enough to do the work on a monthly basis.

to do the work on a monthly basis. It's very important to our outlook for US GDP growth

and S&P 500 direction and returns.

We have to use the subcomponents in conjunction with money

market indicators and other leading indicators

to get a broad picture and understanding of the US economy

and what's driving US GDP growth and S&P 500

direction and returns. Our bespoke index, so the ITPM/NFIB leading SBO index of our 5x20%

contributor-weighted indicators gives us a very good idea of expected GDP and S&P 500 direction.

What the index measures, so small business owner sentiment for the future prospects of the US

economy is also very, very important. Why? Because it's very closely tied to consumer sentiment.

Why? Because 50% of the US workforce work for small businesses. So it's very linked to consumer

behavior. So remember, when we looked at the UMCCSI and we were gauging consumer sentiment

and future consumer spending?

Well, guess what?

50% of the US workforce work for small businesses.

Their own sentiment and outlook

for the future prospects of the US economy,

these small business owners,

is very closely tied to their own expected future consumption.

So, tied to consumer sentiment.

So, we obviously use this in conjunction

with all of our leading indicators,

but it is especially tied to consumer sentiment.

sentiment. So, from a professional traders and portfolio managers perspective, the Small

Business Sentiment Index is very important, engaging for us which way the wind is blowing

for GDP growth, S&P 500 direction and magnitude of stock market returns and therefore our directional portfolio bias.

We use the SBO leading indicator components as a guide and in conjunction with our money market

indicators and other leading indicators to predict turning points in the business cycle and trends, and therefore our portfolio bias, long, short, or neutral,

and we use it on an industry level as well,

in conjunction with the ISM manufacturing

and ISM non-manufacturing industry data

for clues and light bulb indications

for single stock trade ideas in particular industries.

And never forget, the Fed is also watching. The monthly small business optimism leading data

also tells us what we should expect from the Fed in terms of likely future policy response.

And if you are interested in US politics and potentially trying to predict future election results,

small business sentiment is also very important politically in the US because it literally means employment prospects

for the future of average working

and middle-class families in the US.

So it can signify both voting intention

and the outcomes of future elections.

So that just about wraps it up, guys,

elections. So that just about wraps it up, guys, for analyzing small business sentiment in the United States. The NFIB SBO index is very important. It's important that on a monthly basis,

you do go and get this data and get a general gauge and understanding of what's going on with a small

business in the US and put it into context with what's going on at the time and all the other

leading indicators. Up next, we're going to be having a look at cyclical commodity prices,

and we're going to go straight in to the next video. So I'll see you there.