Okay, so welcome back to the screen. Welcome to video number 14. We are going to continue

looking at our leading indicators internationally. And now we're going to be looking in China.

And we're going to be looking at the China official and Kaixin China manufacturing PMIs.

Let's refer back for a moment to our leading indicator dashboard.

Yes, we have our US leading indicators on the left-hand side.

And we have our international leading indicators on the right hand side. In the last

video we included the European Economic Sentiment Indicator into our international surveys list.

Now we're going to be adding China manufacturing PMIs, the official and Kaixin number. And we're also going to be looking at Chinese real interest rates.

Now in the downloads area you're going to find a couple of supporting

spreadsheets for this video. Open them up. We're going to be looking at China

manufacturing PMIs and we'll be looking also at real interest rates in China as well.

If you recall from previous videos, when we looked at GDP lead tables, you'll recall that China in 2019 was at 14.731 trillion US dollars.

And they're ranked number two behind the US in global GDP

and catching up to the US.

The growth rate has actually slowed in China

in the last decade from officially 10.5% GDP growth in 2010 to around 8% in 2021.

Now the 8% in 2021, it's debatable whether that's long-term sustainable. It is a bit of a rebound from 2020 being a low year for obvious reasons.

So the range for the last five years in China has been 2.3% in 2020 as a low and the high of 8.1% in 2021.

The normal, if we want to call it that, pre-COVID-19 GDP growth rate of China has been around 6% to 7%.

Now, it's a well-known secret fact that Chinese GDP stats are very heavily affected.

manipulated due to the reporting lines set up in the country.

And from a trader and portfolio manager perspective, this creates a lot of problems for us.

Because our usual lines of inquiry, so utilizing GDP growth forecasts to forecast stock market

direction and potential returns don't work.

direction and potential returns don't work. So in China, we can't use Chinese GDP

as a predictor of the Shanghai Composite, the Shenzhen Component

Index, or even the Hong Kong, the Hang Seng Index,

as likely stock market direction and returns.

If you recall from way earlier in the video series,

when we did our quadnomial analysis of China, so Chinese GDP and stock market direction on a

quarterly basis, you'll recall that moving in the same direction came in at around 55-56% and moving in the opposite direction

came in at around 44-45% of quarters. So of the total 113 case quarters, which basically means

that they move in the opposite direction almost as much as they move in the same direction.

And you'll also recall that the main reason why they don't move in the same direction

is the 0-1 situation, where the index is reported down for the quarter and GDP growth

is reported as positive, so up for the quarter. So this happens 40% of quarters in history,

which is almost as much as the one situation, which is 46% of quarters in history.

So you'll also remember the weak correlation number as well.

So where the correlation number came in very, very low for the six month lag.

So that's something to remember and recall as well.

So if 40% of quarters, the Shenzhen Component Index is reported down, but Chinese GDP growth is up. Why is that? Well, it's mainly because

GDP stats are manipulated and Chinese indices have low to meaningless correlation with GDP growth

because of it. So when we're forecasting Chinese GDP growth and potentially looking to take

positions in Chinese indices, it's a bit of a fruitless and thankless, naive task to go about

doing that. So let's have a look at some of these reasons.

why a Chinese index like the Shenzhen Components Index can go down but Chinese GDP goes up.

Well, first of all, we have to look at GDP both internally and externally.

Internally, there's 431 provinces in China and 3,418 prefectures that report GDP.

480 prefectures that report GDP. And prefectures report to provinces and provinces report to the federal level, so central government. Local officials in the provinces and the prefectures

need to show GDP growth for their own individual promotional prospects. And they achieve this by either outright manipulation

or pushing through last-minute government infrastructure projects to boost the local

GDP number. And this GDP number, this volume, doesn't necessarily end up being reflected in publicly listed company earnings.

So internally, GDP numbers can be manipulated, thus weakening the correlation between GDP growth

and the stock market. Externally, so external GDP, if you recall, 19% of the Chinese economy is exports.

And 19% of those exports are to the US and 19% to the European Union.

They are the largest export clients of China.

And 50% of their exports goes to other Asian countries.

of their exports goes to other Asian countries. Now, when the US and the EU don't grow,

so they have very low GDP growth or flat GDP growth, or even a contraction, or in the case where we have, for example, US trade tariffs, like under the Trump administration, Chinese GDP can just be manipulated by the controlling party,

the CCP, in order to maintain the illusion of control, in order to stay in power and have

power in the country. So as traders and portfolio managers, if we see the US and Europe slowing down and we

think this is going to be a knock-on effect to Chinese GDP and Chinese indices, it's not

necessarily the case because China can actually still manipulate its figures to maintain this illusion of control over

the economy.

Further reasons for the correlation break: there is no pensions infrastructure in China,

there is in the United States. And the dynamics of the middle class are very different in China

to Western nations and Western geographies like the US and the EU. So we've all heard the statistic

that China has lifted 700 million people out of poverty in the last decade.

Well, there's a problem with that statistic.

The poverty rate or the poverty measure 10 years ago was measured as being individuals living on less than $3 per day. In the modern day, in today's world,

there are still over 700 million people living on less than $4

a day, and a lot more living on less than $10 a day.

So yes, the poverty definition of living

on less than $3 a day, 700 million people

may have been lifted above that number,

but they're still poor.

There's still widespread poverty.

China's demographics and wealth

is basically polarized between Beijing, Shanghai,

and big city elites

versus the rural and urban persons in poverty. The middle class is

emerging there but it doesn't work like the US and Europe where the middle class

is much bigger as a percentage of the population. The population is extremely

polarized in its wealth dynamics. Unlike the US and Europe, there is no pensions infrastructure like IRAs and 401ks.

So what does that mean?

If you have a very small middle class and you have no pensions infrastructure, it's not like the US where pension funds are buying on the behalf of pensions holders,

the stock market every month.

So in the Western world, in the US in particular,

people are paying money into their pensions every month

and the pensions manager is using that money

to then go and buy the stock market every month.

So what does this do?

It guarantees a monthly buyer of the stock market, which obviously

puts a floor under the market. It puts a floor under the stock market. In China, this doesn't

even exist. So low middle class and no pensions infrastructure means there's no guaranteed monthly buyer of any Chinese indices of the Chinese stock market.

Additionally, we all know China has a very large population.

That's the current population though.

There's very little population growth.

The CYPY.

single-child policy, although it's now ended, has meant that in the past, due to there being

no population growth, the internal economy in China does have a consumer headwind. So via

labor force growth and consumer spending growth. So consumer capacity is limited.

Generally speaking, the more people you have, the more people you have in your

labor force. So you have a larger labor force capacity and participation. And of course, you

have more consumers, therefore more consumer spending. But if you're not making any more people,

you don't get any of that. Additionally, in the stock markets in China, there's a lot of

rules, a lot of regulations. It makes it very difficult for international investors and domestic

investors. And therefore, the knock-on effect in Chinese stocks and indices means a very fragmented market that is low correlation to GDP. There's

limited foreign purchases for Chinese stocks. So the Shanghai Composite, the SSE,

comprises of what's known as China A shares and the Shenzhen Component Index

is China B shares. So China A shares are primarily for domestic investors only and denominated

in RMB, the local currency. And China B shares are for primarily institutional foreign investors

denominated in currencies like the US dollar. And if foreigners are purchasing A shares,

it has to be an institution.

So foreign purchases of A shares are restricted

to qualified foreign institutional investors.

Now domestic buyers can't buy B shares.

So for foreign institutional investors,

B shares don't see regular and increasing levels of investment as GDP grows.

Using B shares, so for foreign investors or A shares, that's for domestic investors, as an instrument to predict GDP growth is basically a thankless task.

growth is basically a thankless task. Now for retail traders, the only true way for retail traders to gain exposure to Chinese stocks is via single-stock ADRs

in the US, so American depository receipts and ETFs listed in the US or via single stocks in the Hang Seng China Enterprise Index,

the HSCEI, listed in Hong Kong. Now, obviously, for international retail traders, ADRs

and ETFs listed in the US are by far a better option for those retail traders.

So for all of the shenanigans that surround Chinese GDP growth, how do we even tell if

China is really growing or not?

Well, the best way to do this is to look at non-Chinese government manipulated

figures. As traders and PMs, this is the best we can do. And we have to make a reasonable attempt

here at forecasting Chinese GDP growth in order to not obviously predict it using the Chinese indices, but to do so to fill in the global macro picture

and perhaps to have trade ideas in Chinese listed stocks in the US. So Chinese ADRs and ETFs.

Now, in China, there are two main Purchasing Manager Index surveys.

There's the Chinese Official Manufacturing PMI and the CAICSIN Manufacturing PMI.

And there's also non-manufacturing data that's both open quotes official and sponsored by CAICSIN.

So we are going to be concentrating on manufacturing, the

non-manufacturing or services PMI. The data doesn't go back a long time, doesn't

have a long history, but every month that goes by, every year that goes by,

obviously that data will become more important. So here in this video, we're going to focus on manufacturing.

And we have to remember as well,

the Chinese official PMI stats can also be manipulated

to paint a false picture of reality.

And there's been many times when international investors have seriously

questioned the official stats when they've been released. As traders and PMs, we prefer to look

at the non-official data, so non-government sponsored. We look at the CAICSIN data,

we look at the Kaixin data, which is provided by IHS Market and sponsored by Kaixin.

And what we do is, as traders and portfolio managers, every month when the data is released,

we focus on the Kaixin China manufacturing PMI data. But what we also do is we look at the differences between the Kaixin data and the official data. And this gives us a gauge, not only on a more realistic outlook of potential Chinese GDP growth coming from the

the Kaixin number, but also because when we look at the differences in the two, we can

gauge how much the government is potentially lying about their data.

Now, in terms of a survey design of the Kaixin China Manufacturing PMI, it's compiled by IHS Market as I mentioned and it's a survey with responses to questionnaires

that are sent out to purchasing managers of around 500 private and state-owned

manufacturers. So what do we notice there? Well we do have state-owned

manufacturers as well in there and obviously obviously, that can make even the Kaixin China manufacturing PMI questionable.

So we have to be also a little bit careful with the Kaixin data.

But it's way more reliable on the reality of the situation in China than the government data because

even the state-owned purchasing managers at the state-owned manufacturers, they're

not reporting to the government. They're reporting to IHS market. They're reporting

to a private entity outside of China. So the survey responses that IHS market get are collected in the second half of each

month and indicate the direction of change compared to the previous month. And, and it's calculated for each survey variable.

The index is the sum of the percentage of higher responses

and half the percentage of unchanged responses.

Now our old friend, the 50 level, is our important indicator level again,

similar to US ISM leading indicators.

So our range is between 0 and 100 and a reading above 50 indicates an overall increase compared

to the previous month and below 50 an overall decrease and then indices are seasonally adjusted.

an overall decrease, and then indices are seasonally adjusted. So the headline figure is the Purchasing Managers Index, and the PMI, the headline number, the aggregate, is a weighted

average of five indices. We have new orders at 30%, output 25%, employment 20%, supplier delivery times 15% and stocks of purchases 10%.

And the underlying survey data are not revised after the publication, but there may be seasonal adjustment factors to revise from time to time.

do this as appropriate, which may affect the seasonally adjusted data in the past.

Now in the downloads area, you're going to find all of the data, the historical data for

Chinese GDP, both nominal and real. So you'll see the CPI data there for China. So you'll have inflation adjusted economic growth. So you have

nominal and real GDP data. And you'll also have in the download, the Kaixin and the official

China manufacturing PMI data as well. So you'll have the whole data set there. And what you'll find is some chart analysis on the

data itself. And we can look at this all of our indicators visually. And let's go through them

on the screen. So first of all, on the screen, we have the official China manufacturing PMI.

So this is from the

National Bureau of Statistics, this is from the government and you can see

visually that there's some very obvious peaks and drops and trend occurring. So we

can see going back into the pre-financial crisis period, so '05 to '08, '09. The pre-financial crisis period, '05, '07.

You can see that we had periods of the official number that was in the high 50s and above 55 since then.

And definitely in the period after the financial crisis leading out of it, so

between 2010 and 2020, for an entire decade, we never really got readings above the 55 level.

You can see the peaks, obviously historically, back then in the pre-financial crisis period, the official data peaking in the

high 50s, the overall data set, troughs tend to occur between the 35 and 40 level. What's also

interesting if you eyeball the last decade, you can see that there's a pretty defined top when it comes to reporting

expansion in the official China manufacturing PMI. In particular, if you, 2017, 2018, you can see multiple readings between 50 and 52. So lots

of readings of 50, 51 and 52. And then we tend to peak at 52. And then in the 2020

year we get the recovery of Covid and then we peaked again at 52. So around 52 level seems to be

over the last five, six, seven years a kind of peak for reporting expansion for the official

China manufacturing PMI. In the download you'll also find an analysis on the changes on a month-by-month basis,

so the amount of points that the data has changed month on month. And you can see a general trend

there that over time, the changes have become more muted, apart from obviously the COVID-19 economic

shutdown globally which caused a big contraction in the official China PMI

survey. So respondents reporting very wildly negatively and then the bounce back

reporting very wildly positively. So apart from that, if you look at the entire data set from left to right,

you can see the changes month on month have become a lot more muted.

Also in the download, we can compare the official readings of the PMI versus nominal GDP growth.

of the PMI versus nominal GDP growth.

So you can see visually there is a relationship here between China official PMI versus nominal GDP growth.

And we can inflation adjust using the CPI data

and we can get real GDP numbers. That's all available in

the spreadsheet. And again, you can see visually there is a strong relationship

between even the official China PMI versus real GDP growth. But remember, there's a

weak correlation with the Chinese index or Chinese indices.

So the read-across into using the Chinese index to gauge future economic growth

with an expectation that the index is going to lead and go up and down based on this data,

it's random. It's almost 50/50.

Now, let's have a look at the Kaixin data. This is where things get a little bit interesting because we can look at the

Kaixin data and start comparing periods of history. We can start comparing the

Kaixin data to the official data. So again, this is where it gets a little bit fruity,

gets a little bit interesting, and we can see what the Chinese government is actually up to,

and see the differences between the two. If you look at the screen, there's again very obvious peaks and drops.

You can see other than the bounce back after the financial crisis and at the end of '09, beginning of '10, that we had readings above '55.

We had some readings above '55 in the '07 year preceding, so 2006 and 2007, excuse me, preceding the financial crisis. So a few readings above 55 there and a reading above 55 at the beginning of 2005.

Other than those readings of 55, again, apart from one blip in 2010, the last decade, nothing

above 55.

nothing above 55. If you look at a period between 2011 up until 2017, so towards the end of 2016, 2011 up until 2017, you'll see that there's a lot of data in the Kikesin number that's below 50. And if you think back to this period

when we looked at it on previous slides and you can look at this in the

spreadsheets, if you look back at this period and look at the official number,

there was obviously a lot more readings during that period from the

official number above 50 than the Kikesin number.

So what's that saying? Well, Kikesin IHS market PMI, the private sector PMI, non-government, was reporting in the PMI negative responses and contraction a lot more during this period than the official government statistics.

So this is definitely a period where, for example, in the financial markets community,

everyone was constantly questioning the validity of the Chinese official data and whether they were lying or not.

We're going to look at some of those moments and look at differences very soon in a lot more detail.

We also have the changes month on month for the Kikes in China PMI.

You can see on the screen there the data for the changes on month on month.

So the point changes from the previous month and when you think back to the changes that were becoming

more and more muted from the official data, the magnitude of the moves in the

Kaixin China PMI data hasn't really changed at all. The magnitude looks pretty consistent throughout history.

We can also look at, obviously, the Kaixin PMI data

versus real GDP in China.

We've left nominal out.

here for now, but you can look at that in the spreadsheet. But what we've got on the screen

here is Kaiksin PMI versus real GDP, so adjusted for inflation. And yes, you can see a very strong

relationship between the direction of the two and Kaiksin leading GDP, which is reported later.

Now, this is where things get a little bit interesting,

because we've actually got a chart which plots the differences in the Kaixin and the official

manufacturing data. So, if we look at the differences here, what we've done is,

is we've just minused the official number of the Kaixin number.

So what does that mean?

Well, if the China official number is reported as higher than the Kaixin number,

then we're going to get a negative reading

on the difference.

If it's reported lower,

we're going to get a positive reading

on the difference.

So what does that mean?

Well, let's have a look at the

data here. You can see there's a lot more red bars in the history versus

positive green bars. So the differences are in the majority negative, meaning that the

China official PMI for the majority of the

history of the data has been reported for the month on month change as higher than the

Kaixin. So what does that mean for us as traders and portfolio managers? Well, it basically means that we have to take everything in the China official PMI data that is in red.

We have to take it all with a big pinch of salt.

So in any of those bars when we had the China official number,

any of those bars at those moments in time, any of those bars that are red,

we have to take the official data with a big grain of salt and read into it that it was actually

potential lies. And what does it mean going forward? Well, it means that we genuinely can't have a lot of confidence in the official data

in using it to forecast Chinese GDP. Now, we always like to go a little bit further at ITPM

to try and get to the bottom of things, to get to the truth. So everything you're seeing here in the

red, we would label as potential mice because we're essentially

just minusing official

of caixin and the official is

registered as higher.

If you look at it from the perspective of the Chinese

government

and look at a motive

behind why

they would potentially lie. Well, if the Kiksin is actually becoming as a contractionary number

or reports a contractionary number below 50, but then the official number is reported as above 50,

what they're basically saying in their motive is that they don't want the world to think that the

Chinese manufacturing sector is actually contracting.

Now, we always like to go a little bit further at ITPM, do some digging, get to the bottom of things

and reveal the truth so we know what's really going on in economies.

If you think of the context of when the Chinese government might be lying, well, the motive to lie is most likely to occur.

And the Chinese government doesn't want the world to think that the Chinese manufacturing sector is going to contract.

So they report a number of growth.

So report a number above 50.

On the previous screen, we just looked at the Kitezin number minus the official number, regardless of what the numbers were.

And we tracked that data and we saw that there's a lot more in the negative.

We've done the same here,

but what we've also done is isolated the times

in the historical data

where the official PMI was reported above 50

and the Kiksin PMI was reported below 50.

And you can see this visually on the chart

with the yellow bars.

So we're in the negative where we have

the official being reported as higher than the Kaiksin.

But it's at moments in time when the official number

is above 50 and higher than Kaikin and Kaixin is below 50

showing contraction. So this is basically the Chinese government telling you that they

don't want you to think that the manufacturing sector is contracting in China. This in the yellow bars is what we can call as trainers and PMs, definite lies. So,

naughty, naughty CCP. If we look at the data set going right back to 2005, we can see if we look

visually at the yellow bars, they lied once in 2005. They lied a few times coming out of the financial crisis. We

have a big cluster in that period we looked at earlier, 2011 to end of 2012. We have a big

there where the Kaixin PMI was showing contraction below 50 and the Chinese

government was just outright lying for a long time that their respondents were not

responding negatively but responding positively in the manufacturing sector.

So again this is where we get a big cluster and a lot of discrepancies and actually for the for the whole period

from 2011 up till 2017 there's a lot of these moments where the Kixian PMI is

reporting contraction negative responses from the manufacturing

purchasing managers and the official data is reporting expansion above 50. It's

just outright lies. What's also interesting is a more recent moment in

history where we get a lot of negative readings in both Kaiksin and official

number during 2019 where basically the Kaixin number

was reported higher a lot of times

than the official number,

even though many of those numbers were negative.

And you can see this represented on the screen

with the green bars in 2019.

But what's interesting is when COVID happened, the red bar that you're looking at there

is March 2020, and the yellow bar is April 2020. So they were potentially lying with the official

data in March 2020. But they were definitely lying in April 2020 when they reported an expansion, expansionary

responses from the manufacturing sector, and the Kite SIN was reporting a contraction, so

negative responses. Again, you can see that visually via the yellow bar, that's April 2020.

And then afterwards, we have this period in 2020

where they seem to be telling the truth again.

So yeah, interesting period in history.

If you think of all the green bars

going back throughout history

and compare that to the 2019-2020 period,

maybe they started telling the truth.

But going forward, we'll find out.

Now, something else we can look at in China, as with any economic region, we can look at the government bond market and we can look at interest rates.

So our money market leading indicators, but located in China. And if we look at the government bond market,

China is actually the world's second largest government bond market

behind the US.

And the bond market there in China is $16 trillion US dollars

equivalent in issuance.

And approximately 98.5% of China's government bond market remains onshore.

And it's denominated in renminbi, so RMB.

And there's no access allowed at all at this moment in time by international investors.

You know, that might change in the future.

But as of the time of recording, no international investors can trade or invest in Chinese government bonds.

And because of this, again, it's difficult to use Chinese government bonds as a proxy

or leading indicator to Chinese GDP or index direction and returns.

direction and returns. So from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective,

when there's little to no private market, it makes the yield or the risk of the debt in terms of price discovery fairly meaningless to us. The best we can do here, guys, in China,

us. The best we can do here guys in China is look at real interest rates. We can get interest rate data and CPI data going back to the year 2000 and we can look at interest rates adjusted

for inflation and therefore look at real rates in China. So you'll see this data in the spreadsheet file in

the downloads area. The file that you're looking for is called China Real Rates. And here we've got

the China Real 10-year rate. So using the 10-year benchmark rate minus the CPI all items.

And you can have a look at that data yourself in the downloads area in the spreadsheet.

What we've also done is charted the Chinese real 10-year rate versus the US real 10-year rate as well.

And what's interesting about this data, if you look at it visually,

when we make the comparison, you can see there's a pretty tight relationship between the two. And

except in very recent history in the data set at the time of recording, where there's a big discrepancy between US negative real rates and very high real rates in comparison in China.

Maybe, just maybe, they may be lying about their inflation data.

Who knows? I'll leave that up to you to decide.

I'll leave that up to you to decide.

Now, just as a reminder, seeing as though we're covering real interest rates here in China,

this information was from the video earlier in the PTM video series

on real interest rates when we were covering them in the UK.

US. And if you recall, real interest rates in their differing forms are the real price or cost

of money. All things being equal, if money is cheaper, market participants are going to borrow

more of it. And when it's expensive, they're going to borrow less of it. And what were the

implications that we looked at? So cheaper money or relatively cheaper money than before,

we get more borrowing plus more liquidity and that leads to inflationary conditions and

expansionary GDP. Relatively expensive money from the previous period leads to less borrowing plus less liquidity and deflationary conditions

and contractionary GDP. In terms of equity market volatility, when we have relatively cheaper money,

we get less volatility in the equity markets and higher liquidity. When we have relatively more expensive money,

we tend to get more equity market volatility

and liquidity goes down.

Now, when we think of real rates in the Chinese context

and from a trader's and portfolio manager's perspective,

we generally can't use Chinese real rates as a leading indicator to predictably forecast equity market direction and volatility and also central bank policy.

So why is that the case?

central bank policy. So why is that the case? Well, if you think of our five points that we made earlier, where we covered potential GDP manipulation from the Chinese government, the fact that there's

no pensions infrastructure in China, the fact that there's middle class problems and demographic

headwinds, and also the equity market is very closed to foreign purchases.

It basically means that the indices will probably not behave predictably in response to real rate

decreases and increases.

Also, when it comes to central authorities in China or central bank policy, it doesn't

work like it does in the US with the Fed and the dual mandate.

The CCP is political and they control the money supply and the debt market.

Predicting from a traders and portfolio managers perspective, what these guys are going to do next,

based on Western ideals, is a naive step. So for China, we just have to assume that if the government

is manipulating interest rates, higher or lower,

then they're more than likely active in the bond market.

What we can do as traders and PMs,

we can keep an eye on the Kaixin China manufacturing PMI

on a monthly basis.

And we can look at the difference

between the Kaixin data and the official data

and stay on top of Chinese real rates.

And if we use them all together,

we're having a very good effort

in getting a sense of expansion and contraction prospects for the Chinese economy. It's not ideal,

but it's the best we can do. So let's summarize this now with China and the Caxxin PMI and China real rates data, how is it useful to us as traders and PMs?

Well, of course, if we follow it, we keep up to date with it, we're going to get a much more accurate picture of China's GDP growth prospects and the direction of GDP in terms of expansion or contraction.

the direction of GDP in terms of expansion or contraction.

And it's going to help us form our global macro view and understand the relative GDP growth prospects

and potential stock market returns in different geographies.

And we can use the data to predict future revenue and earnings that are changing

at US companies that have large exposure to the Chinese market. We can also use the information

to potentially generate trade ideas in Chinese stocks that are listed on the New York Stock

Exchange and NASDAQ as American depository receipts that have very high revenue and earnings exposure inside China.

So again, we go to our ADR full list at the source there, top foreign stocks, which of course may change in the future.

So get good at your Google search terms.

So get good at your Google search terms.

You'll always find sources that have all of the listed ADRs.

And the Chinese ADRs are available there at the time of recording.

We can also use the information to generate trade ideas in areas of the global markets that rely heavy on Chinese demand in sectors such as the mining sector, metals, autos, chemicals, construction, energy stocks

that exist on exchanges in other countries and trade as ADRs in US dollars on US dollar exchanges.

ADRs in US dollars on US dollar exchanges. And again, we have the full foreign ADR list there.

So we're not necessarily just looking at Chinese ADRs.

We can look at, for example, European ADRs.

So European companies that have ADRs

ADR listings in the US and they have large exposure to the Chinese economy.

Now, we also know that because of China's heavy export dependence on the US and the EU,

that if we see a slowdown in the US and the EU PMIs, that this is going to show up in the

Chinese PMIs in the future. So we can potentially take positions in Chinese ADRs

based on our analysis of both US and European PMIs.

What we can also do is take positions in Chinese ADRs

based on our statistical analysis of the manipulation of Chinese GDP and also the

manipulation of the official data versus the Caxin PMI. Because we know when we spot the lie,

when we spot the fraud, that the reality that's going on is different. The fantasy GDP stats and the fantasy PMI

stats from the official number are probably not going to show up in Chinese

company earnings. So Chinese companies that are listed on US exchanges

because of US reporting standards.

So for example, if we see the lie evolve in the PMIs

or we suspect that GDP stats have been heavily manipulated

or they're going to be heavily manipulated,

if Chinese ADRs go up on this information by a lot, we know that the Chinese companies can't lie

about their earnings like the government has lied in the official PMI data or with the GDP number.

So we can potentially look for short positions there when we recognize them, when we recognize what's going on.

Additionally, with Chinese stocks, Chinese ADRs, there's a lot of accounting fraud. Chinese government that exaggerates or bends the truth or lies about GDP growth

and PMI data but Chinese companies themselves repeatedly have been caught a lot in specific

accounting fraud to their companies. So we can of course also look to potentially

take short positions or have put option structure positions in Chinese ADRs that

are exhibiting company specific accounting fraud. And just

Just as a reminder, be careful when you're looking at Chinese ADRs.

Make sure that the ADR you're looking at is a listed ADR, so listed on exchange, and it's

tradable, and it's tradable in your retail trader account.

And it's not an over-the-counter instrument.

Even better, of course, if it's listed and there's listed equity

options available as well. Okay, so that just about wraps it up guys for the

Chinese leading indicators, the Kaixin China PMI compared to the official PMI and

also with China real rates.

We're going to head straight into the next video now and we're going to do a recap

of all of our leading indicators.