Okay, so welcome back to the desk. So that was the dark world of technical analysis and

price action indicators. All you have to do guys is remember a few things when it comes

to TA and PA. It's really not that complicated. Just remember, firstly, that the picture that you're

looking at on the screen is a photograph of the fundamentals behind price. Okay? Secondly,

we use TA and PA as indicators to help us make decisions for timing only. So we add value to our executions for both entry and exit

for positions. Okay. The advantage that they give us is helping us to add value to our executions

for entry and exit and therefore our timing only for our ideas. So ideas that we already have in place

with a directional, fundamental predisposition or bias. Technical analysis and price action

is just not rocket science, and they do not generate trade ideas. It has its place in our process and it's for timing only. So what do we do if we are concerned about our timing on entry? Okay. Well, we just sit back and we wait for a better level. Okay. It's down to our discretion. So it's down to your discretion now in the future. Okay. Now, when it comes to

PRM, we're not going to literally set you risk management rules or parameters that you have to

stick to and abide by at all times. That would just be really, really silly. Why? Because you have to learn to do this

for yourself in practice and risk management is actually flexible. Plus, risk management in a

long, short equities portfolio mandate has an endless amount of permutations and it's really

situational to your own portfolio that you build.

You're going to discover this and more as we go through particularly this video, but also

the next video as well. In the video after this, Chris Quill is going to go through very

various PRM measures that you can put in place by modeling the measures in a model portfolio.

So this is so you can understand them, why they exist in the first place, and also so you can

actually calculate them properly. So at this stage, you can begin to make your own decisions

which preventative risk management measures you will

put in place for your own purposes, okay, to suit your own portfolio. And you'll be able to do that

in the future when you're doing it in practice. So we're going to go through all of them. Okay,

so let's get stuck into trading psychology and PRM, preventative risk management,

and I'll see you back at the desk a bit later.

Okay, so welcome back to the screen.

We're going to move into the next stage of the PTM video series now,

and we're going to be looking at trading psychology

and preventative risk management.

Specifically, what we're going to do here is do the groundwork and lay the foundations to get your head right before you start trading live.

So part of this video is actually going to be quite fun to go through.

You'll probably recognize a lot of behaviors that you've experienced yourself

in the past, but the messages are actually very important and you do need to walk away from this

video fully understanding what we're trying to get across here. Because if you don't, it can be

extremely costly with real money losses in a very short space of time and also missing out

and potentially not experiencing in your trading very big gains so before we get

started we have to put into context here and have a reminder of the pro-trader systematic process for long-short portfolio

management within the 20 to 60-day time horizon. So we have our fundamentals, our quant and our

qualitative processes. We have our timing and our catalysts and trade structure. And then we have

finally our risk management. And our risk management only really comes into play when we're either about to have a live

portfolio or we actually do have live positions.

And risk management essentially splits up into two parts, preventative risk management

and reactive risk management.

Preventative risk management is all of the

things that we put in place before we actually have a live position in a stock, long or short,

or before we have a live portfolio. And reactive risk management is

when we actually have a live position in a stock, long or short, or we actually have a

live portfolio with real positions.

And again, when it comes to our time horizon, we must never forget that a trade idea is not

an investment idea, nor is it a day trade.

Remember, we are 20 to 60-day long-short portfolio managers. We want to run

positions long enough to take advantage of a trading volatility profile, but we don't want to run

positions long enough or too long that they end up becoming investments. And this is important to remember, especially when

it comes to your risk management as a long-short portfolio manager or trader. So where do we start

in terms of getting our heads right? Well, when we have a trade idea that's actionable,

it means that we have the fundamental tailwind behind us whether

that's a long or a short we have our catalysts in place and we have timing

that's balanced in our favor and we have chosen our trade structure and as I've

mentioned several times prior in the PT and video series we're only going to be looking at the trade

structure of long or short stock or CFDs in the video series and we're not going

to be looking at options positions so directional call option and directional

put option structures so when we refer to stocks in this video, if you're in the US, we're referring to stocks in a trading account where you actually have 50% margin requirements or two times leverage.

And if you're sitting outside the United States with international trading accounts in the rest of the world context, what we're meaning here is contract

for differences. So CFDs on stocks. We cover options structuring in the professional options

trading masterclass video series. And learning how to structure options trades is an entire

discipline in itself, and it requires a lot of educational information and learning. The theory for options

structuring is available in the POTM video series and it's important to get live experience trading

options over a long period of time over many trades and that is essentially covered in the ITPM mentoring programs.

So what we do in the PTM video series is assume that you have a trade idea in a stock, whether that's long or short, and you express this idea via a long or short.

or short position in the stock itself.

Of course, when you get more sophisticated

and learn more about trading and graduate to options trading,

you can express those positions utilizing call

and put option structures.

However, it is only right to do so

if you have a directional view on the underlying stock.

So for the purposes of discipline here in the PTM video series, we are going to assume that you

have a view in the stock, so a trade idea, long or short, and you're representing this with a

position in the stock itself or in a contract for difference which mirrors one for one this

underlying stock price so with that assumption in place when we have a fundamental tailwind

with us we have our catalysts and we have what we believe to be decent or good timing, so we have a green light with the technicals and the price

action, and we've actually chosen our trade structure.

It's time to have a stock position, long or short.

So at this stage, it's now time to think about risk management.

And as we mentioned previously, risk management splits up into two categories,

preemptive risk management, PRM, and reactive risk management, RRM.

And what we're going to be looking at here in the PTM video series is preemptive risk management.

For reactive risk management, you actually have to have a live position.

And when a position goes right or wrong, there's literally an endless amount of things that you can

do, an endless amount of actions that you can take on that position. And unfortunately, there is no

rule book for reactive risk management. There's just multiple best practices,

and these cannot be taught in a video series. They have to be taught live, and the way this is done

at ITPM is via our mentoring programs. Reactive risk management can't be taught in some sort of user guide or manual.

Reactive risk management just has to be taught with live positions and having a pro trader sitting on your

shoulder and literally overseeing what you're doing.

So in the PTM video series, we're going to be covering preemptive risk management.

But why do we have any of this in place to begin with?

Well, prior to learning our long-short portfolio management techniques,

our risk management, you have to first understand why these things

parameters, these risk management parameters are necessary. So the real question is here,

is why do we even have preventative risk management? What are we trying to actually

prevent? Well, we're obviously trying to prevent unnecessary losses, and the parameters are necessary because of human psychology or putting it another way,

the failings or weaknesses of human psychology when it comes to trading and money management.

The reality is, is that once you decide a trade idea is actionable, then moments from that time, you are going to have a real and live

long or short stock position, and the stock will actually be moving.

Now, as we are located in the 20 to 60-day time horizon, and we choose our annualized

portfolio volatility to be around 20%, it means that most of our single stock positions

are going to likely have upwards of 30%

annualized volatility.

And there will definitely be some

with much higher than 30% annualized volatility.

And even though, of course, we strive to have

low correlation across our positions

in our portfolio there is going to still be some correlation and due to this correlation effect

within a diverse long short stock portfolio the overall annualized volatility of the portfolio

will be lower than the volatility of any single stock position in the portfolio.

And if you recall, Chris Quill covered this in the previous section of the PTM video series, Foundations of Portfolio Management.

And he will go deeper into this and further add to it in the next section of the video series via more spreadsheet classes.

But the reality is when we have live portfolios,

we're going to have situations all the time as traders

where things go our way, so things go right,

and things go against us or go wrong with live positions.

So we anticipate this.

We absolutely expect this to be the case before we even have a position or a live portfolio. So prior to going live,

you have to understand human psychology. You have to get your psychology right as a trader,

and therefore you need to get your head right. So what we're going to do here

by way of an example is we're going to get your head right. We're going to play a game

and we're going to trade marbles and I am going to trade marbles against you.

And we're going to put ourselves into this hypothetical scenario, scenario one, where I am paying you.

So you are getting paid.

And this is a one-shot game.

So you only have one attempt at this game, just one chance.

Now, there are two boxes with marbles in them.

There is box A and box B. In box A there's a total of four marbles

and there are three blue marbles and one red marble making up those four marbles. And in box B

there's just one marble and that marble is green. Now you are putting your hand in the boxes. So, you have a choice,

box A or box B. If you put your hand in box A and pull out a blue marble, I pay you $1,000.

If you put your hand in box A and pull the red marble, I pay you nothing. If you choose to put your hand in box B,

well, there's only one green marble,

and that pays $700.

And obviously, before you put your hand in any boxes,

you know what the marble situation is in each box.

So you know, for example, in box B,

that there's only one green marble. So if, for example, in box B, that there's only one green marble.

So if you put your hand in box B,

and you pull the green marble, you get paid $700.

So the question is, which box do you choose?

Which box do you put your hand in?

Do you choose box A, or do you choose box B?

I'll give you a few moments to decide.

Okay, so that's enough time, I think, to make a decision.

Now let's move on to the next scenario.

Scenario two, we have the same situation with the two boxes,

but now you are paying me.

So you are paying out,

but you are still putting your hand in either of the boxes.

It's you, not me.

So if you put your hand in box A and you pull a blue marble,

you pay me $1,000.

If you put your hand in box A and pull the red marble, you pay me nothing.

If you put your hand in box B, well, there's only one marble.

You have to pay me $700.

So I'll give you a few moments to think again. In the situation where you're paying me, do you choose box A or do you choose box B?

Okay, so you should have had enough time there.

Hopefully you've decided by now what action you would have taken in scenario one when you are getting paid and in scenario two when you're paying out.

So when you're paying me.

So let's go through this.

time and time again in either survey responses or in a live setting in a room with a few hundred retail traders is that in scenario one where people are getting paid there tends to be a 70%

30% split in favor of box B and sometimes it's even as high as an 80-20 split in favor of box B. And sometimes it's even as high as an 80-20 split in favor of box B.

So the majority of people, majority of retail traders tend towards box B in scenario one

when getting paid. In scenario two, in which you are paying me,

crowds of retail traders tend to always skew towards box A disproportionately.

And sometimes we do get an 80-20 split in favor of box A,

but it's actually usually 90-10 in favor of box A. And a lot of times in survey responses or in a live setting in a room that's full of retail traders,

a lot of respondents will choose box A for both scenarios

or even box B for both scenarios.

So there's an overlap in their choices depending on the scenario.

But overwhelmingly, most retail traders who do choose the same box will choose box A twice.

And in this situation, in both scenarios, if they've chosen the same box, well,

nothing has changed with the boxes. It's the same payout. So the psychology of those

respondents is actually totally screwed up. So let's have a look at the first scenario, getting paid.

Well, scenario one, getting paid, you're facing a positive dollar outcome. So if we think about what box A and box B represent, they can be described

as risk for box A and certainty for box B. And when faced with a positive outcome, human beings tend

towards certainty. Humans like certainty when they're getting paid. In trading, this means taking profits too quickly. Overall, human beings tend to focus too much on locking in profits because it's a comfortable feeling. What we have to do as traders

is focus on letting our profits run. And this is an uncomfortable feeling. So the right answer

from a trader's perspective for scenario one, getting paid, is box A. We have to seek risk

and move away from certainty. We have to seek to allow our profits to run and we have to accept that risk exists and possibly even take

more risk by adding more capital to a winning position. So when times are good, when we're

making money, we have to seek out risk. Now, what about in scenario two where you're still putting

your hand in the boxes to choose the marbles,

but from your choice, you are now paying me. So this scenario we call paying out, this is when

you're facing a negative dollar outcome. And when faced with a negative outcome, human beings tend towards risk-seeking behavior. Humans don't like

taking losses. Humans are averse to losses naturally. Humans want a chance at having no losses,

no matter how small that chance is. And in trading, this means holding on to losing positions for too long

instead of taking a guaranteed loss. And for humans, taking a guaranteed loss is naturally

an uncomfortable feeling. The natural human reaction is to choose to hold onto a losing position and do nothing and hope that we get out

of it for nothing. This is the comfortable feeling. So in this situation, when times are bad, when we're

paying out, when we're losing money, like in the scenario when we're getting paid, we have to understand our human psychology and natural human condition.

When we're paying out, we have to restrict our losses.

Why? Because capital is not infinite.

Capital is finite. Losing when we're paying out, we have to understand the human condition, human psychology,

and we have to understand that capital is a finite parameter.

It's limited.

Therefore, we have to seek to restrict losses to guaranteed outcomes and therefore preserve

our capital.

We can't simply hold on to losing positions forever,

engage in this negative behavior repeatedly, and then our capital goes to zero and we blow

up. So, in the scenario of paying out, the right answer is

box B. Now, if you recall, in both our examples of the scenarios, getting paid and paying out, this was a one-shot game. You had one attempt. But now, assume an infinite amount of trades in our lifetime. So we're not just playing this game once, we're playing it an infinite amount of

times. Well, whether you play this game once or whether you play it an infinite amount of times,

it doesn't matter. The probabilistic payout, the probability adjusted payout of risk. so box A is the same. And of course, we know the payout of box B,

that was simply $700.

That is certain.

What's not certain is box A, which presents us with risk.

And on a probability-adjusted basis,

the payout of box A is $750, so it's higher.

And because these numbers are quite close together,

750 for box A and 700 for box B, this tends to confuse people in their responses. So imagine if you magnified the numbers, so there's a bigger difference between them. So this example does

tend to cause confusion because the numbers

are quite close together. But if you magnify these numbers so the difference is larger,

it becomes really obvious. So when you look at this in trading and in human psychology,

what does it actually mean? Well, it means when we're looking at our portfolio, and let's say we have a 10-stock portfolio with six longs and four shorts, and at the moment in time that we're looking at the portfolio, we have five winners and five losers.

So we have five positions that are making money and five positions that are currently losing money. Well, a human would naturally tend

towards the behavior of increasing the position sizes of all their losers or just not do anything.

But if they are increasing the position sizes of their losers, they would essentially be looking to improve their average price so they feel that they

have a better chance of getting out, not losing money. What are they doing in this situation?

They are seeking more risk and pulling from box A when they are in a losing position.

So they're pulling from box A in the scenario

where they're paying out.

They are paying out to the market.

And on the flip side, in the other situation,

when we have a winner and we're getting paid,

what do humans tend towards?

Well, humans in that situation, when getting paid, tend towards certainty.

So in trading, this means human behavior tends towards taking profits on winners too quickly because it feels comfortable.

So if these actions are being taken repeatedly over an infinite amount of trades, over an infinite amount of time, what's the likely outcome of this portfolio?

Well, the trader is just going to end up with a portfolio of losing positions because they're trading out of their winners and putting more money into their losers or actually just doing nothing with their losers. And the losing positions will likely

continue to keep losing. And even if they're doing nothing with their losers, they're not even adding

to their positions. Well, they're selling their winners, they're raising cash, and that cash in

the next cycle of trade ideas is just going to go into losers and winners. The winners will get traded out of and the losers

will keep losing. So eventually, no matter how long it takes, that trader is going to blow up.

A real trader would do the opposite of this. A trader would cut their losers and pull from box B and get certainty in a losing position

or when they're paying out to the market.

And they would engage in capital preservation

and they would take the money and add it to their winners

or even just run their winners.

And in that situation, running winners is pulling from box A

and this is seeking more risk.

So the big lesson in psychology here of humans versus traders, what do you actually have to do

in trading? Well, you have to train yourself into the behaviors of being a trader and train yourself

out of the behaviors of being a human. And this is something

that for most people doesn't come overnight. It takes a lot of real money and real world practice

and experience to get used to this. As mentioned previously in scenario one, getting paid,

Previously, in scenario one, getting paid, most respondents respond by putting their hand and choosing to pull from box B. And in scenario two, when paying out, an overwhelming majority of respondents tend towards pulling from box A.

And this is simply the human condition.

And it's obviously nothing to be ashamed of

because it actually just means you are human,

which in most cases is a positive, it's a good thing.

But unfortunately in trading,

It's a bad thing.

And we can actually highlight this with a great example, with an interview question that we always gave at Goldman Sachs.

This is a question we would always ask all the time in interviews to graduates hoping to get a position on the trading desk in London at Goldman Sachs for when they left university.

So the question is, let's assume we've hired you. You've actually been hired at Goldman Sachs,

and you're now part of the trading desk. You're hired. You are trading money live on the trading

desk at Goldman Sachs as part of the business. And your job as a trader

is very obviously to make money. So given that you're now a professional trader and you're sitting

on the desk at Goldman Sachs, let's go through a real life example. and in each scenario, you have to tell me what action you would take.

So here, we have a random stock in the year 2019, and it doesn't matter what stock it is.

It doesn't matter what the name is. We just want to know after you've entered this position,

what your action is going to be in each scenario.

So let's make the assumption that you're going long here and you have the fundamental tailwinds.

You've done all of your work on the quant and qualitative. You're feeling very confident about

your fundamental work. You've got your catalysts in place, your technicals and price action indicators

are showing a green light,

and you've gone long the stock.

And if you look at the screen here,

where the red arrow is,

we're going to assume that you've gone long the stock

on that day, and you are in at the price

of the yellow line.

So from the screen, this looks like you're in at $116.

And the stock is up since you bought it five trading days ago.

So the stock is now at $120.02.

You are in at $116.

So you're up around $4 a share, and everything is looking quite nice.

And the date today, when the stock is at $120, is the 29th of November, 2019.

So in this situation, we're obviously doing okay here.

We're getting paid. But if we fast forward to the beginning of 2020,

the stock is now trading at $133.49. So let's say $133.5. The question is in this

scenario, what would you do? What's your action? And there's only three things that you can actually

do. You can either trade out, you can run the current position without actually doing anything,

or you can add to the position. So which one do you actually choose?

Okay, so think about that for a moment. Which choice do you make?

Okay, so you've probably made your choice by now. Let's move on to the next time horizon.

So we go a month later, and we are now in the first week of february 2020 and the stock is now 116 dollars

and 45 cents so we'll just call it 116 and a half given the choice that you made uh in january

whether you trade it out uh whether you uh ran the position or whether you even added to the position what would you actually do

now well if you'd have traded out in January you'd actually have no position so you'd be sitting there

quite relaxed but you do have choices if you've traded out of the position, you can either do nothing or do something. Doing something means

buying stock at the current level. If you decided to run the position, you now have some choices.

You can either trade out of the position, you can either do nothing with the position,

you can either do nothing with the position or you can add to the position.

And this is actually the same set of choices if you chose in January to add to the position as well.

So based on your own individual decisions in January, what is your decision now?

What is the action you're going to take?

I'll give you a few moments to think about that.

Okay, now that you've decided your next action,

let's fast forward just a few more days.

Not a month, but just a few more days.

And now it's the 7th of february 2020 and the stock is trading at 111 dollars and 55 cents so it's now below your cost at 116 dollars if you've run the position throughout and

just maintained the same position additionally if in january or on the 3rd of February, you actually added to your

position or on the 3rd of February, you initiated a position, the price that you've entered is higher than the November price.

of $116. So on the 7th of February, like the guy who took the position in November at $116,

you still have a position, you're in the game, and now you're underwater on the 7th of February.

Now, at this stage of the game, at this stage of the example, if you are one of those people that did trade out in January

or on the 3rd of February, you are no longer now in the game. So the only people watching this

example right now that are still in this game are the people who have a position. And that's either going to be somebody

who initiated the position in November at $116,

who chose to run the position

and then didn't take any action in January or February the 3rd,

or it's going to be somebody who added to the position in January

or reinitiated a position on the 3rd of February.

It doesn't really matter, but for the purposes of this game,

we just have to understand at this stage who's in the game and who's out.

If you've traded out at this stage, you are out of the game.

If you still have a position, you are still in the game.

So if you are one of those guys that's still in the game, you still have a position, you now have three choices.

You can either run the position, you can either add to the position, or you can either cut the position.

What's your choice? You have to choose one action.

I'll leave you a few moments to decide.

Okay, so if you cut the position and that was your choice,

that was the choice of the action that you've taken you are now

officially out of this game if you chose to either run the position or add to the position you are

still in the game so if you're still in the game you're running your position let's fast forward to the 21st of February.

And now the stock is $106.11.

But if you're still in the game, you have three choices.

You can either run your current position,

you can add to the position, or you can cut the position.

You have to make one choice.

What's the choice you make?

I'll again leave you a few moments to decide.

Okay, if you cut the position, you are now out of the game.

If you chose to run the position,

or add to the position, you are still in this game.

Okay, now we fast forward a few more weeks

to the 3rd of March, and the stock is now $78.19.

And if you're still in the game, you have three choices.

You can either run the position, you can add to the position,

or you can cut the position.

I'll leave you a few moments to decide.

Okay, so if you cut the position, you are now out of the game.

If you decided to either run or add the position, you are still in the game.

And now we're going gonna fast forward a few more

weeks to the 13th of March and the stock is now $32.33. If you're still in the

game do you run the position do you add to the position or do you cut? Again I'll

leave you a few moments to decide on that.

Well, if you've decided to cut the position, you're now officially out of the game.

If you've decided to run the position or add to the position, you're still in the game.

If we fast forward to the 23rd of March, the stock is now $28.19.

And if you're still in the game, you're again faced with three actions.

You can either run the position, add to the position,

or cut, what's your choice?

Well, if you've decided to cut your out of the game now, if you decided to run the position

or add to the position, you are, of course, still in the game.

And now we're going to fast forward an entire year and see where the stock ended up one year

later. One year later, the stock is at $83.90

and didn't trade anywhere near the original cost price

of $116.

As you can see from the chart,

the high for the entire year was just shy of $100.

So in the high, $90, around the $98, $99 level. But the point here is if you'd have

taken the action, taken the choice to continuously run the position at each of those times when you

are faced with the choices of run the position, add to the position, or cut. If you'd have made that choice to run the position,

you'd still be one year later underwater and losing money on the position.

Now, if you'd have chosen at various points to add to the position on the way down,

If you'd have added in February or early March, you would still be underwater and losing money on the position because your average price would be higher than where the stock is trading one year later.

When I presented you with the choices, when the stock was at $32 and at $28, taken a big drawdown in your portfolio on a mark-to-market basis,

and you would have literally had to have hold on for an entire year just to break even.

Now, when it comes to this as a Goldman Sachs interview question,

well, if you'd have made either of those choices to run the position or even keep adding to the position all the way down, unfortunately, there'd be a serious question mark

over whether your instincts as a trader are good. And also, it would be obvious that you have no

trading experience as well. Therefore, unless other areas of your interview,

all other areas of your interview were absolutely exceptional,

which if you'd have given those answers is probably unlikely,

then unfortunately you just wouldn't be hired.

You wouldn't even be considered.

And categorically, if you were actually

a professional trader on the desk desk and you took those actions, either running the position all the way down and hoping for the best or continuously adding to the position all the way down, that would actually be a sackable offense.

At a company like Goldman Sachs, you'd simply be fired.

At a company like Goldman Sachs, you'd simply be fired.

And just for the record, that stock, I know we didn't name the stock earlier because it didn't really matter because that situation applies to all stocks. But the stock in question was actually the cruise lining company, Royal Caribbean, going into the COVID crisis.

going into the COVID crisis.

However, as mentioned, it doesn't really matter what the stock is called or even the specific situation.

This applies to all stocks and all situations

throughout time as a trader.

You simply cannot engage in those behaviors.

You simply cannot engage in those behaviors. And this is exactly why we have risk management

and specifically PRM, preventative risk management.

Why?

Because it stops us from being human and it makes us

us engage in all of the good practices of being an actual trader. And one of the most basic things

we can do as traders is to implement stop losses, meaning that if a stock trades at a certain level

against us, we guarantee that we only lose a certain amount of money. We get stopped out.

And this is what's known as a hard stop loss.

A hard stop loss guarantees our downside.

And in our marble trading game, this is pulling from box B.

When we have a hard stop loss in place and we guarantee our downside and we're pulling from box B, this is when we are paying out to the market.

So when we're losing money.

This action stops us from being human and seeking out more risk.

Now, what is also a typical thing to do as a trader is not just to have some sort of stop loss in place,

but to also have a target.

So when we're making money,

when we are getting paid by the market,

we have to have a plan or process in place

to deal with that situation. A plan or process that stops us being

human. And unlike the situation where we have hard stop losses in place, when we're losing money or

paying out to the market, when we're getting paid by the market, so making money, we don't have a hard target. We have what's called a soft target.

So we use soft targets so we don't limit our upside. So we are pulling from box A when we're

getting paid by the market and making money. As we know, human beings, when we're being paid,

when we're making money, it feels comfortable to lock in the

profit too early. And having a soft target stops us from this human behavior. So specifically,

what do we mean by a soft target? Well, let's have a look at an example here. So let's say we

bought a stock at $100 and we decided that a sensible stop loss is 92.

So if the stock traded at 92,

we would just trade out of the position

and take an $8 loss per share.

So we have a hard stop loss at $92.

And then we have a soft target or target price one

of $125, which is roughly three times the amount

of the stop loss.

Now, let's say the stock then does actually go to $125.

What is the action that we take next?

Well, as long as the fundamentals are still in place and at $125, we still believe that there's potentially more upside here.

We wouldn't limit ourselves to making just $25 per share because it feels good to lock in that number.

share because it feels good to lock in that number. What we would typically do is roll up the stop loss to a level something like $117. So that would be $8 below the current price of $125 a share.

And if you then actually did get stopped out at $117, you would still make $17 per share on the trade. Now, that's

the situation if you just ran the original position. But what if you actually decided to add to the

position and take even more risk? Well, just back of the envelope calculation here, if you doubled the size of your position at $125, your new average price per share will be $112.50.

And even in that situation, with a stop loss, a new stop loss rolled up at $117, if you did get stopped out, you would still make $4.50 per share. So you're still making a profit.

And if it does actually continue going up, which if it's a winner and the fundamental news flow is

coming through with the catalysts, if it does continue going up, which is most likely in that

situation, you're now going to make double profit for every tick that the stock goes up so for every

penny or dollar that the stock goes up for every tick you're now making double because you've

doubled the position size and the stock could just continue going higher to say 135 140 145

and then this would end up being a big winner in your portfolio. Now, of course,

when we're going through examples like this, please don't take this to mean that in every situation

that you're involved in, this is exactly what you should be doing. This is obviously not a rule book.

These are simply examples to help you understand some best

behaviors and best practices that you would engage in to not engage in human behavior.

Every situation needs to be taken on its own merits, and this, over time, just builds up

with experience. So don't think this is all a blanket rule

that you have to apply to all situations

all the time throughout your career.

It simply isn't.

There isn't a rule book.

Now, when it comes to risk management,

something else is...

we should be covering and discussing here is risk-reward ratios.

So in this example that we just went through,

it's not a coincidence that we selected a hard stop loss of $8

and a soft target of $25

because this actually provides us a risk-reward of just over 3 to 1.

provides us a risk reward of just over three to one.

So in this example, it's the forecasted profit,

the soft target on the upside, $25,

over the guaranteed loss of $8 in being stopped out,

which gives a risk reward of the trade of 3.125. And this in trading is known as an R-score. It's the ratio of the dollars made on winners divided by the dollars made on losers.

So if you did hundreds of trades, for example, you would take all of the gains, all of the

dollar gains from all of the winners and divide it by all of the dollar losses of the losers

to obtain an overall R-score as a trader.

But the definition does apply to a single trade as well when you're going into the trade

and having preventative risk management.

So if the volatility exists and the soft target is realistic

and the hard stop is at a sensible level,

what do we mean by sensible?

We mean that the stop itself is wide enough

given the volatility of the stock in our time horizon

to give you a good chance at making money and being right.

But at the same time, it's not so wide that you're being irresponsible and you're being totally

dishonest in your approach.

So when we're taking positions in single stocks in the 20 to 60 day time horizon, in most cases, we are going to be seeking before we go in to assess the volatility and have some sort of soft target and stop loss in place.

and stop loss in place. Now, we don't necessarily have hard stop losses

in place all the time.

This is something we're going to go into in a moment.

But we have to understand the concept here,

so it needs to be fully explained.

So when entering a trade, hard stops and soft targets,

if we've decided a hard stop is the way we want to go we must always enter

a situation in which our soft target is realistic and probable within the 20 to 60 day time horizon

and by the same token our hard stops

stoplosses must be wide enough to give ourselves a chance of making money, but not wide enough

that we're being ill-disciplined and allowing ourselves to be human. So in the 20 to 60-day

time horizon, we assess volatility. And if we decide that we're going to have a hard stop loss or some sort of stop loss in place on a trade structure, and of course, having a soft target, it must be in the bounds of reality and therefore within the bounds of volatility over the time horizon. And we're seeking generally to set a one to three ratio on pretty much all trade

structures. And this is just a good discipline for three reasons. Firstly, if we take this approach

and we want to get paid at least three times what we pay out to the market, then we're not going to enter trades that don't provide us with at least this outcome as a

probable payoff and this can only be a good thing for our trading accounts secondly just by the very

nature of the numbers we know going into a situation where we try to apply this ratio within the bounds of volatility all the time

that if we trade out of all of our winners at target prices and all of our losers at the stop

loss prices then our dollar ratio between winners and losers across multiple trades in our trading account will be three times.

So for example, on a $100,000 account over say 200 trades,

we can make say $264,595 on our winners

by pulling from box A and running the winner

to the target price.

And we can lose on our losers, say $83,548 on those losers.

So pulling from box B at the stop loss prices.

And in this situation, the R score in our portfolio is going to be 3.17.

the R score in our portfolio is going to be 3.17. So there's a very nice and comfortable,

quite large difference between what we make on our winners and what we lose on our losers.

And essentially what's happening here over 200 trades is that the $83,548 of losses are inventory in our trading accounts that allow us to make the profits of $264,595. So we know that we're not going to get all of our trade

right. No one ever has a win rate of 100%, very obviously. We go into this with our eyes wide open

and we have a realistic approach and we just accept that we're going to have losers in our

portfolio. But our losers, we see them as necessary inventory to enable us to make money overall.

necessary inventory to enable us to make money overall. What we don't want is a situation where one position or two positions over a long period of time and many trades become significant losses and wipe out our profits. are inevitable. They're going to happen in trading, in financial markets. We just have to

take an approach where we contain them and stop us from being human. Now, thirdly, it takes the

pressure off us in not requiring a high win rate percentage in order to actually make money. So we have a low break-even threshold

when we apply the one-to-three ratio

within the bounds of volatility of the time horizon.

So in our example of a $100,000 account

with, say, 200 trades,

this would actually mean 50 trades being winners

and hitting our targets so 25% win rate and 150

trades being losers and hitting stop losses so 75% for our loss rate in order to satisfy the condition

of breaking even now in this situation if we do actually get more than 25% right so we have

a win rate percentage that's higher than 25% we will be making money and certainly throughout

those 200 trades being executed if we add to our winners and engage in that behavior and they pay even more dollars than the

difference between entry price and soft target then we can in theory get less than 25 percent

of our trades right so when we think about what this one to three risk reward ratio means. With a target R score of three,

our dollar wins are three times our dollar losses.

So over four trades,

one win plus three losses equals zero or break even.

Therefore, 75% of trades can be losers,

while 25% can be winners to break even.

And we can apply this formula to our previous example, where we had a risk reward of $25 for the target divided by 8.

we got an R score of 3.125. So one trade is a win of $25. And three trades can be losers at $8 at a 3.125 R score. So there's four trades in total. One winner over four is a quarter. So 25% for the win rate.

so 25% for the win rate, and 3 over 4 is 3/4 or 75%, and that gives us our loss rate. And these are the conditions that satisfy our break-even condition.

When using a 1 to 3 risk-reward ratio applied to stocks within our time horizon of say 20 to 60 days and are in the bounds of

volatility and set at realistic and sensible levels. So as a reminder, if we just go back

one page, setting this one to three ratio on the trade structures, whether it's single stocks or options,

is just a good discipline for those reasons. So firstly, preventative risk management.

We go in to the stock, we do a volatility appraisal, and we want to apply the one to three condition. If the stock volatility shows us that this is possible

and we can set realistic soft targets

and sensible stop losses,

then having this condition satisfied

can only be a good thing.

Additionally, if we're treating this as a business

and we are realistic that losses are inevitable, then purely from a business perspective, running an inventory of losses that are contained to enable us to make money on our winners is also a responsible approach.

And then finally, it takes the pressure off us in requiring a very

high win percentage. So we know going into it that if we have a significantly higher win rate

percentage than 25%, we're going to be doing very well and making very good money.

doing very well and making very good money. So we understand human psychology and we understand the bad behaviors that we don't want to engage in. We approach trading and our trading accounts

as a business and we accept that throughout time losses will occur and also we will get

trades wrong and we

apply PRM

preventative risk management practices

to enable us

overall to make money

over many trades throughout

time. Now the burning question

that's probably running through your mind right now is how do we actually assess volatility in

order to come up with or set realistic targets and sensible stops, stop losses. Well, we have some

spreadsheet downloads in the downloads area to accompany this video. You can navigate towards the download area and grab those spreadsheets.

And we're going to go through some examples here.

And yes, you've guessed it.

We're going to revisit our old friends, the distribution of returns, DOR analysis.

And from the IPLT video series, our average true range percentage are ATRP.

And both these analyses can be used to help us understand volatility over our time horizon

in setting targets and stops.

So what we're going to do here, we're going to run through some examples.

So what we're going to do here, we're going to run through some examples.

So the first one we're going to be looking at is long trex, T-R-E-X.

And we're going to make the assumption with this example that we are looking or seeking to enter a long position in trex in November 2020 at current market levels around $75, $76, last price $75.34. And what we'll be doing is running through some exercises with the distribution of returns analysis

and steps and thought processes that you would go through to assess the volatility and look at setting

a realistic target and also a sensible stop loss.

In addition to that, we're not just going to look at a long example.

We're also going to look at a short example.

So we're going to look at an example of being short STZ, so Constellation Brands.

And we're going to look at shorting that stock, look at the volatility, the potential target, and stop loss on entering a short position at current market levels, assuming that we're sitting in the time, again, November 2020.

assuming that we're sitting in the time, again, November 2020.

So with the stock price being around $204,

last price $204.21.

So if you've downloaded the spreadsheets from the downloads area,

let's start with the long treks example.

And in those spreadsheets, you can follow along as we go through this example.

And what we've got here on the screen is screenshots where we're looking at monthly data.

And on the left-hand side,

we've got the close-to-close monthly data.

monthly returns of Trex.

And on the right-hand side, we have the high to low range of monthly returns

for the same data for Trex as well.

The total count is 259 to 260 months for the data.

And we have our distributions of the monthly data,

the historical data displayed in the tables and also visually in the distribution charts.

So if we look at, for example, the close to close monthly data for TREX and look at the descriptive statistics, we have a mean, which is a positive number, 2.511%, and we

have our distribution around that mean.

And you can see by looking at the positive and negative data points that there's in the

count more positive months than there is negative months.

So positive months is 139 versus negative 120.

And the average return from those 139 occurrences

for a positive month is 13.1%.

And for a down month, the 120 occurrences,

we have an average return of negative 9.75%. On a probability or frequency adjusted basis,

in the positives, we get a frequency adjusted return

of just over 7% at 7.03%.

And in the negatives on a frequency adjusted basis,

the frequency adjusted return for the negative months

is negative 4.52%.

And if you look at the distribution just visually here,

you can see that in down months,

most of the time in the majority of the times,

down months are occurring,

where we get a negative up to negative 6% on the downside.

And in the positive, most months from our data in the positive gives us a 6 to 12% monthly return.

So you can see these are the biggest bars in the distribution.

Now that's the close to close data.

So taking the closing price of the previous month

versus the closing price of a current month.

But let's turn our attention to the high to low data

on the right hand side.

And remember, the high to low data is a range and can occur in both down months and up months and we can see here from the table and also the descriptive statistics that Trex is a volatile stock.

to low range here in the mean on a monthly basis of 26.24%. So when we're actually looking at all of

this data, how do we actually disseminate the data and start to begin to attempt looking at setting

realistic targets and sensible stop losses? Well, we look at the data in the top

tables, and we look at the ranges of the returns, so the ranges of volatility, and we look at the

probabilities of those ranges occurring, and we seek to take a probabilistic approach where the odds are in our

favor. So let's go through this example in how you would actually process and interpret this data

and information in order to set realistic targets and stops within our 20 to 60 day time horizon. Now, we're not going to be flicking back

to the data constantly as we go through these numbers. So do try to follow along at the same time

with the downloadable spreadsheets. So let's start here. If you look at the data,

If you look at the data, only 14.67% of months from the Trex data has Trex actually moved down by more than 12% on a close-to and wanting the odds in our favor, our next

thought would be what would happen if we set a stop loss of around that number, so a stop

loss of 12%.

Well, we'd have an 85% chance of not being stopped out in the next month according to

the historical data.

month according to the historical data. Now, if we then applied a 1 to 3 risk reward ratio,

this would give us a target of 36% upside. So a price target of 36% higher from the current price.

And we're trying to achieve that within 60 days. And next, we have to look at whether this is likely or not.

And if we look at the close-to-close data, the likelihood or probability of the stock having a close-to-close range on a monthly basis of positive 36% in the first month, for example,

that we have the position on, according to the

historical data, that probability is less than 2.32 percent.

So it's very unlikely.

However, if we look at the high to low range data on a month to month basis,

we conclude that we have an 82.69% chance of the stock having total volatility in the range of positive 5% and plus 35% on the month.

But remember, this also includes down months in the data.

this together, we conclude that if we're wrong on the trade in the first month that we have the position on, we're probably going to know about it very quickly. So it's just going to be a down

month for the stock. Now, our fundamental thesis may or may not be intact if that happens. It really doesn't matter. 12% is probably too wide of a stop loss

because the target of 36% is really only achievable

if everything goes right for three months in a row.

So 36% over three months, roughly 12% per month.

So we're adding our cumulative probabilities together

to assess what the likelihood of that happening is in a particular month. So we add 9.65%, 8.88%

plus 3.47 plus 2.32 and we get a 24.32 percent probability of that happening which means

the odds are against us in getting a positive 12 return in the first month

and then it happening again and then again in the second and third month. So the odds are against us for this to happen to get 36% over a three-month period.

So we have that 24.32% probability of having a month where the stock moves up versus last

month over 12%.

And we need that to happen three times in a row.

So what are we concluding here by just doing our back of the envelope?

Well, we're seeking to make money here within 60 trading days, not in a time period that's over 60 days with low probabilities in place.

So what we're going to have to do here, we have to tighten the stop loss and the target to make it more realistic and more sensible.

So if we used an 8% stop and a 24% target, this is more realistic given the volatility assessment

that we've just been through. We would have there between a 14.67% and 28.19% chance of being stopped out. So around a 20% chance of being

stopped out in the first month from last month's closing price. So the odds of us not being stopped out

even with an 8% stop, the odds are in our favor.

On the upside, when it comes to our target,

by not having the pressure of being right three months in a row

and having low probability for that to happen,

by having a 24% target,

we would only need two months of the stock

moving up approximately 12% per month from the current

price to meet our 24% target. And we have a 73% chance, a 15% return in a month versus the previous month.

So if you look at the cumulative probabilities in the high to low monthly return tables,

you can see that there's a 26.92% probability of the stock on a month-to-month basis moving less than 15%.

So if we do a calculation where we minus that of 100%, we get the probability of 73%,

which is the probability of a month-to-month move greater than 15%. So we have the odds in our favor

that if we're actually right

and the stock does move up,

that we'll have enough volatility

to hit our targets with a high percentage chance,

a high percentage probability.

So as you saw from the chart earlier,

the stock was currently $75.34. So let's assume

that's our entry price. With 8.24, that would give us a stop loss of $69.31 and a soft target of $93.42. So from current stock price, the total dollars for the stop loss, it's $6.03 per share.

And the dollars for the soft target is $18.01 per share, which gives us a risk-reward ratio of three to one.

Now, with these price targets,

so the price target here of $93.42,

what you've actually done here is an exercise

of working out a sensible price target

over a particular timeframe,

so in our case, the 60-day timeframe,

and you've worked it out on a volatility basis. a particular time frame. So in our case, the 60 day time frame.

And you've worked it out on a volatility basis.

And yes, on a volatility basis,

this is a realistic soft price target.

But it's only obviously realistic if you've arrived

at this stage and you've done all of the quantitative qualitative work as well and

you have catalysts to drive the stock price higher what you would also do at

this stage is overlap this analysis with your quantitative analysis and look at

the valuation appraisal of the market and make an assumption that in the next period, the market pays the same

multiple or slightly higher for the earnings growth and or revenue growth of the company

and figure out, given the quantitative, qualitative, and catalyst assessment, whether this is actually

a realistic price target, also based on valuation. So we know

in this instance with Trex that from the current stock price to the soft target, it's a 24% move

higher in the stock. So from our quantitative assessment, when we've arrived here and done our

volatility appraisal and got a soft target.

We would look at our valuation assessment in the quantitative,

look at our qualitative drivers and also our catalysts.

And we would base our forward-looking valuation

on a 24% move higher,

potentially in earnings per share and also an increase in revenue,

and figure out if this is actually fundamentally realistic.

And if it is, we have a nice overlap between a volatility assessment and a fundamental assessment,

which means overall, in any situation, if we have a realistic fundamental assessment, which means overall in any situation,

if we have a realistic volatility assessment reaching a realistic price target

and we have a realistic price target derived from a fundamental assessment

and they overlap, then it means we have a highly probable scenario.

So in our Trex example,

let's have a look at what this would look like on a chart.

And we fast forward three months to February 2021.

And on the chart, we have our entry level,

which is the $75.34 level in November 2020.

We have our stop loss marked on the chart of $69.31.

And we have our target also marked on the chart of $93.42.

And the target was reached in mid-January,

so within a couple of months.

So this was obviously a trade that went very well.

The stop loss and the target was set at realistic levels.

And the stock did actually pretty much exactly

what we thought it was going to do in terms of volatility. We got the volatility appraisal right

and of course we got the fundamental direction right as well and it took just a couple of months

to reach the price target. Now in terms of risk management, we had our preventative risk management

in place with our stop loss, our hard stop loss and our preventative risk management

will have actually changed as the stock rallied so as the stock was rallying from the entry price

we will have been faced with different choices that we could make as a winning position we could

have just run the position or we could have uh pulled from box a

and uh taken more risk seeking more risk and added to the position and we could have even

rolled up the stop loss in most cases what we probably would have done in a situation like this

uh is we would have rolled the stop loss uh when the stock hit our soft target so we would have rolled the stop loss when the stock hit our soft target.

So we would have rolled the stop loss to around 8% below the soft target price and possibly

even buy some more stock within self-imposed single size position limits as long as we had

room to do so. However, always remember, there's always no

one-size-fits-all rule to all situations here. And that's because everything really is situational

depending on the merits of this specific situation itself. Whenever you have a trade-on,

specific situation itself. Whenever you have a trade-on, certainly for the 20 to 60-day time horizon, and you've done a lot of work around quantitative, qualitative, and catalysts, during

that time period, fundamentals can and will likely change while you have the trade-on. So during the

lifetime of a trade, you're going to be making assessments

as the stock either goes in your favor

or goes against you as to what has changed fundamentally.

And your risk management is going to move accordingly

with that assessment.

So Trex is a good example

of how you would actually do your volatility assessment

to achieve a stop loss and a soft target for a long position.

Now let's have a look at an example where we're looking at a short position.

And here we're going to have a look at Constellation Brands, ticker STZ.

ticker STZ. Now of course like our TREX example, we are making the assumption here that you've arrived at this stage and you've done all of your quantitative,

qualitative and catalyst assessment and also your timing. So when you're

arriving at this stage with a short

short, you're very likely to have done all of this work and come to the conclusion that you believe

this is a negative outlier with genuine negative catalysts about to occur and that the stock is not

only going to underperform its peer group and the market, but it's also going to go down in value.

And a lot of the time in financial markets, especially when you're looking at shorts and you're looking at companies and stocks that have had a positive history, but they've now gone X growth.

in an attempt to appraise volatility, to get to a soft price target to the downside,

and also a hard stop loss above current prices,

the data may not show probabilities that are highly in your favor.

Why? Because with an X growth stock, it means that the majority of the past data is probably positive

because previously in history, the company was actually

growing and the stock was going up. So let's have a look at this data for our Constellation Brands,

STZ. We have our usual format, same format as our TREX example, where we have our close-to-close monthly data on the left-hand side and our

high-to-low monthly range data on the right-hand side. We have our frequency and probability

tables at the top of our analysis. We have our visual distributions, and we have our descriptive

statistics. And if you look at the close to

close data, descriptive statistics, we notice straight away the mean number is a positive

number of 1.778%. So the average move on a month to month basis using the count of 344 months, the average move is an up move of 1.778%.

So straight away, that's a conflicting number

with our view on the stock here,

because we're going short

and we want this stock to be going down.

If we look at this in a bit more detail

towards the bottom of the descriptive statistics for the close-to-close monthly data.

We can see that from the count, we have 202 months that are positive

and 139 months that are negative.

So 59% of months, roughly, we get a positive month

and around 40, 41% of months are negative months.

So our negative months are in the minority.

So roughly 60% of months are positive

and 40% of months are negative.

And when we look at the average move,

For a negative month, it comes in at 6%.

If we then turn our attention to the high to low range data on the right-hand side,

we can see with the frequency and probability data that there's a very large grouping of below 18% for the monthly range.

So on a month-to-month basis, the stock not moving more than 18%,

there's a very big grouping below that number.

So if we're looking at the cumulative percentage column,

we can see that 77% of times in history,

the stock on a month-to-month basis

doesn't have volatility that's above 18%.

If we look at the descriptive stats, the mean for the high to low month-to-month range

is just under 15%.

So when we initially, in any situation, look at the volatility data in tables for any stock this is the type of information

that our eyeballs are attracted to over time you're going to get used to doing this but we're going to

go through these processes in every situation and attempt to try and set a sensible stop loss and a realistic target based on our volatility assessment

and taking messages from these numbers.

So if you have the downloaded spreadsheet in front of you,

you can follow along as we go through this.

When we look at the close to close data,

you will find that 20.65% of months STZ has moved up

by more than 8% in a month versus the previous month.

And we calculate this by highlighting the probability

on the previous screen.

So we're just adding the 10.6% and 2.33%

the 10.6% and 2.33% and we get to 20.65%. So this tells us throughout history from the count data

that 20% of months on a close-to-close basis,

the stock goes up more than 8%.

And therefore, 80% of the time,

the stock performance on a month-to-month basis

for close-to-close is less than 8%. So if we, in theory, set a hard stop loss of 8%,

we have around an 80% chance of not being stopped out in the next month, according to the close-to-close

historical data.

So we can conclude here that if we're just wrong on this trade in the first month, we're

probably going to know about it very quickly, so it's just going to be an up month.

for the stock and we're probably going to be very close

to being stopped out or getting stopped out.

Now, if we apply our one to three risk reward,

this would give us 24% upside on the trade,

which translates into obviously,

because it's a short 24% downside in the stock

as our price target within 60 days. And then we go through the process

of figuring out what the likelihood of that is. So if we look at the table again, the likelihood

or probability of the stock having a close to close range that's above 24% in the first month. So the month upcoming is less than 2.33 percent. So that's very unlikely.

So we turn to the right hand side of our data and we look at the high to low volatility range at this

stage to get an appreciation of what the total volatility is on a month to month basis.

And we note at this stage that for the stock,

according to the historical data,

for the stock to have a 9% move or greater,

and we just take note at this stage

that for the stock to have a high to low range

that's greater than 9%,

according to the historical monthly data,

that's happened 75.65% of times.

And the way this is worked out

is that we look at the cumulative column

and we look at the cumulative probability

of all of the months in the count

where the range has been lower than 9%

and we minus this off 100% to get the 75.65%.

So we're starting to build up a picture here

from the volatility profile of the stock

about what might not just be possible,

but what is actually probable.

Now, from our potential 24% target to the downside,

from the data, we're obviously concluding

that we're going to need two to three months of the stock

going down between 8%, so that's over three months,

so 8% per month, and 12% over two months,

so 12% going down each month 12% over two months, so 12% going down each month 12%

or two months to meet the price target

of the stock being down 24% within the three-month time period.

Now, these numbers on a month-to-month basis

are obviously approximate,

but when we do this as a back of the envelope

and then we look at the data

for the stock to close lower by more than 8%

on the previous month, we're actually presented

with a probability of 12.21%.

So again, this is unlikely.

So what do we actually conclude from this when we do the volatility appraisal in the context of our potential trade idea here, our potential position?

Well, for the short to work, we would actually need the high to low volatility to play out to the downside within the month.

However, in the upcoming month, if the stock is down by more than 8% on the month, the likelihood of it closing on the month below that price is 12.21% probability.

What we're going to need here is a fundamental shift or change in the stock to the downside.

So the stock has an abnormal move to the downside during the next

month. Because to justify why we're in the short, we actually need it to stay down and have the same

bad performance the following month. And this is fine as long as we have identified an X growth stock and we have negative catalysts that are occurring.

So our fundamental thesis is actually intact and we have the catalysts.

Of course, we can put the trade on.

potentially an X growth stock here, the past data is giving us low probabilities of outcomes for reasonable moves down in the stock. So if you think back to our fundamental framework,

when we're looking at shorts, and also when we looked at our different phases, so our five phases

of a short, what we're trying to do here is pick X growth stocks

that are in phase two and phase three, ideally.

And from a volatility appraisal perspective,

what we're wanting to happen is for the stock

to essentially break the historical data

and to have abnormal moves to the downside. So we're looking for a

cluster of two to three months of data to the downside. And you can see now why it's very

important that you have to be very confident with your shorts in terms of the fundamental analysis,

in terms of the fundamental analysis, the catalysts, and even the timing.

And you can see why it's so important,

why we try to catch our shorts as X growth in phase two and phase three.

Because if we catch them in phase two and phase three, these are abnormal moves,

and we're more than likely to get abnormal returns from those abnormal moves.

Additionally, what you also have to understand here is our mandate as long short portfolio managers.

We absolutely do need to have shorts in our account.

can't just be long everything all the time. That's not our mandate. So it's likely in periods

of economic expansion when you're looking for shorts, but when you look at the historical

month-to-month data, you're going to bump into many situations like this, like STZ, where the past data is in conflict with your short trade idea. And this is exactly why

it's so hard to find high quality shorts in an expansionary economy. And when the stock market

is in a bull market, you are constantly looking for those large and mega cap shorts that have turned a corner and have gone X growth and

are in now phase two or phase three. To have the conflicting historical data there is fine as long

as your fundamental thesis is intact and you're timing these trades well in terms of the phase

that you're going in to the short.

And of course, goes without saying, but I'll say it anyway, that it's a genuine fundamental shift.

Because when that happens, the past data doesn't actually mean anything.

So if we were going into this shorting STZ in November 2020,

what would this have looked like from a stop loss and target

perspective? Well, we've got our 8% stop and our 24% soft target. And we know from the past data

that with an 8% stop, we have about a 20% chance of being stopped out in the first month.

And we're comfortable with that because if we do get stopped out,

it just means we're dead wrong.

And we've stopped ourselves from being human

and fighting the market.

We also know that to reach our target,

approximately we're going to need two to three months

of the stock moving down by 8% or 12% per month to meet the target from here.

But if we do get the direction right,

we do have the volatility available to us.

We have a 75.5% chance of getting 9% and above

high to low range in terms of the volatility.

So if we do get the direction right here, the volatility

historically does actually exist. So to get our numbers, to get our stop loss and our target

in terms of stock price dollars, we take the current stock price in November 2020,

uh 204.21 we apply the eight percent stop loss uh this gives us a stop loss of 220.54

and then applying the three for one uh the 24 target uh to the downside our soft target to the downside

this gives us $155.20.

So on a per share basis for the stop,

this is $16.33 per share for the stop loss

and for the target, $49.01 for the target per share.

And just to double check the numbers,

we divide the target by the stop loss

and this gives us a three for one.

So let's fast forward in time and see how this one actually worked out.

Well, we fast forward to February 2021 and unfortunately this one, short STZ, didn't work out.

short STZ didn't work out.

So we would have entered the short position towards the end of November in 2020.

And then we would have been stopped out

at the beginning of January in 2021.

So we would have lost $16.33 per share.

So it kind of lines up with the volatility appraisal

that we did.

We didn't get stopped out in the first month, so we had a sensible stop loss.

It was wide enough to give us a chance at being right, but it wasn't too wide where we were being reckless, stupid, and being human.

So we got stopped out at the beginning of the second month that the trade was on.

So we got stopped out at the beginning of the second month that the trade was on.

So entering in November, towards the end of November,

and we would have been stopped out on the position on January 6th.

And when you think of STZ in the context of a portfolio and in the context of our previous example with Trex,

of our previous example with trex,

this now leads us into discussing another topic and raises some issues with hard stop losses.

So imagine a situation where you have a portfolio

and you decide to put hard stop losses

on all of your longs and on all of your shorts.

We do need to use some sort of stops in our portfolio

to counter our tendency towards human behavior. However, hard stops in a long short portfolio

do also have limitations. So imagine this situation if you have a portfolio of 10 positions with say six longs and four shorts and

you have a net long portfolio bias so in that situation uh very likely that you've got that

type of profile uh in your portfolio as the economy is expanding revenue and eps estimates

across the market are rising on average and the stock market

is rallying.

You still need to have though shorts in your portfolio.

However, with hard stop losses, we could be in a position every two to three months during

expansionary phase where we just keep getting stopped out of short positions and running long only

trading accounts which is obviously not our mandate. So we simply can't allow this to happen. If we get

caught too long when the market has a drawdown period and sells off and we have no short positions on

then we're going to lose big money when the market

does go down. It's our job when the market goes down to make money in all market conditions. So

we have to make money when the market goes down as well. Now, Chris Quill is going to look at this

in more detail in the next part of the PTM video series.

However, one step that we can take is to actually apply spread stops.

So if you recall from earlier on in the PTM video series,

when we looked at spreads,

we looked at minusing the value of one stock off another and looking at the outperformance and underperformance

of two stocks relative to each other.

And if you recall, the value of a portfolio

is simply the outperformance versus the underperformance

of a whole bunch of stocks.

So when it comes to hard stop losses and soft targets, because at any one moment in time,

even though we do try to control correlation in our portfolios, correlation is likely to be present.

Some sort of correlation will be there in our portfolios. And when the market goes up and down and all stocks move in the same

direction together we just never want to be in a situation for example where we're running a long

short portfolio the market goes up 10 we get stopped out on hard stop losses on all of our shorts

and then we're naked long we just have longs in our portfolio and then the

market goes back down 10% and then we get stopped out on all of our longs because that means we will

lose money on all our positions. And in that situation, we're essentially in a long short

portfolio being whipsawed by the market and the end result is that you'll blow up. So setting spread stops and

targets within your portfolio is a good way to minimize this impact and to remedy this situation.

Now there is no rule book here. Remember, there will be situations from time to time where it's sensible to use a hard stop loss

on a position but there will be other times when it's sensible to use spread stop losses

and also potentially portfolio stop losses. Everything is situational and what's

more important here is that you understand why you would use them and then learn how to appraise

volatility and the situations themselves and just use common sense. Unfortunately, we can't give you

an instruction manual or a rule book which tells you in all situations to impose a hard stop loss,

situations to impose a hard stop loss, a spread stop loss, or to have a portfolio stop loss of a certain amount all the time.

It just doesn't exist. So if you feel at any moment in time, as a trader, long short portfolio manager, that you're screaming at the sky, howling at the moon, asking, what do I do here?

Do I set a hard stop loss?

Do I set a spread stop loss?

What shall I do?

Somebody please tell me what to do.

You're taking the wrong approach.

You're doing it wrong. You need to look at the volatility appraisal of the stock.

You'll have a portfolio where you've already done the volatility appraisal of other

stocks. You'll compare this to your valuation work, your quantitative assessment, and your

qualitative assessment and catalysts. And you're going to apply common sense to the numbers.

And as long as you take an approach where you're setting

realistic targets on a single stock or a spread, and also setting sensible stop losses,

where you're giving yourself a very reasonable chance of staying in the position and making money within the 20 to 60 day time horizon. So the stop losses

are wide enough to enable that to happen. But at the same time, they're not too wide that you're

being dishonest and reckless. If you take that approach overall, and you learn the process and

understand the numbers and apply common sense over many trades

over a long period of time you're going to get it right most of the time with practice and you're

going to add value in terms of your preventative risk management in not allowing yourself to be

human so let's have a look at this trex st spread. And what we've done here is we've minused

the STZ stock price off the Trex stock price. So recall, we're going long Trex and short STZ.

And something you would likely do when you're looking at a spread, you would look at the

outperformance, underperformance of the two stocks over a longer period of time just to get an

understanding and appreciation of what the relationship of the two stocks has

been like over time some things to note here when we look at the data of this

spread on the chart.

Trex is colored in white.

STZ is colored in orange.

And we've normalized these stock prices starting at an index value of 100 in February 2020.

And this one-year chart, which takes us up to February 2021, shows Trex and STZ in absolute terms

and their index and percentage performance.

So we can see when we look at Trex, the white line,

the Trex index hit a high of 215.81

and is currently at 208 spot 36.

And that translates into a performance over the one-year period of 108%.

The STZ data was starting again

at the index level of 100.

The index got to a high of 127 spot 57,

currently 118 so STZ over that one year period was up 18% if we

look at the spread data at the bottom so this is where we're taking the STZ

stock price and minusing it off the trex stock price. Overall, we get a negative number because STZ, the stock price for

STZ, is larger than the Trex stock price. But because this is Trex minus STZ, when Trex is

outperforming STZ, this spread, although it's a minus number, is going up in value, so moving closer to zero,

closer to the positive. And when Trex is underperforming STZ, it's going more negative.

We look at our high and low data February 2020 of 155.

So in the one year period, this is the most extreme point

where Trex was underperforming STZ.

And then we have our high of minus 72 in March 2020,

which is the most extreme point

where Trex was outperforming STZ and we

just make note of that with a bit of common sense here and stock market

historical knowledge this was around a period of extreme volatility during

COVID times so prior to the COVID sell-off we had trex underperforming stz

and uh at the bottom of the coveted sell-off we had trex massively outperforming stz

and this was really due to the nature of the businesses trex is in the business

of wood decking and railing and STZ, Constellation Brands, is an alcoholic beverage producer.

And the spread, if we fast forward to the full end of year, one year of this data to February 2021,

we can see the value of the spread is negative $120. Now, let's assume we are now sitting in November 2020, so on November 19th, 2020. And obviously, right now, we have the benefit of hindsight of knowing what actually happened to those stock prices and the relative performance.

what actually happened to those stock prices and the relative performance.

But at the time, on November 19th, we just obviously would not have known any of that information.

And we would have had to have just gone on the historical analysis of the spread. And of course, we wouldn't have even arrived here unless we'd have done all of our fundamental work

and genuinely thought that Trex was a long and STZ was a short.

And if we look back previous to November 19,

this is what we would have been looking at.

And we would see that overall from the start date in February 2020,

where we indexed to 100,

that there is a trend in our favor

that Trex is outperforming STZ.

But if we look at the chart at the bottom,

the actual dollar value of the spread,

we can see that between April 2020 and October 2020,

the spread was trading within a range of the value negative $120 to negative $100.

And then in November 2020, the spread breaks the negative $120 level to the downside. And then we are sitting at November 19th with the spread at around negative $130. And we have decisions to make on our execution and how we enter this with preventative risk management in place.

We're basically looking at a level of a negative $130 on the spread, and we have to now do our work and understand the volatility of the individual the stocks individually of returning certain amounts within time periods of a month and being right over a period of one, two,

and three months.

So the thought process here.

when we're thinking about our work on the distribution of returns,

analysis on the individual stocks,

and our work on analyzing the spread itself historically,

we would probably just be thinking to ourselves

and doing a back of the envelope of applying a 10% stop roughly

and a 30% target for our three-for-one and just looking at what that looks

like on the spread itself. So if we applied a 10% stop to a negative $130 spread price,

spread price, that's going to be a stop of $13, which on a three-for-one gives us a target of $39.

So taking off $13 from the spread value of approximately negative 130 gives us a stop loss on the spread of negative 143. And adding $39 to negative 130 gives us a target of $91. So your thought process here

when you're sitting at these points in time before you actually do the actual and exact calculations

would be to do a back of the envelope and just look at what would be a reasonable

and sensible stop loss and target

given all of the information that's available.

And then just question whether it is reasonable or sensible.

So we're sitting at a value here of negative $130.

If we applied a stop loss on the spread of negative 143, if we look at that spread

data at the bottom of the chart, it probably means that we're just dead wrong on the spread and we

should be stopping ourselves out. Also with the target, if we're sitting there on November 19th and we're adding $39 for our target to get to

negative $91, we have to ask ourselves, is this within the bounds of reality? Well, it's a 30%

move in the spread. And given the distribution of returns analysis that we did earlier, where we had targets of 24% on TREX and 24% on STZ. We concluded that the move,

that type of move for TREX was highly probable if we get the direction right in terms of the

volatility. However, with STZ, that type of move would only be possible if we got a genuine fundamental break, fundamental shift to the downside for the short.

When we look at the spread value itself, we do have evidence over the last year, obviously, that,

that this spread has traded to a high of negative $72.15.

But we do have to be intellectually honest here

and realize that during that period,

it was a high volatility period generally in the market.

So over the next 20 to 60-day time horizon,

if we're sitting there on November 19,

and we just assume normal volatility

generally in the market, we have to ask ourselves, is the stop loss sensible, and is the target

within the bounds of reality? Well, it is as long as we get a fundamental break to the upside in trex and or we get a fundamental break to the downside

in STZ. It can very obviously happen if we get that, but if general market conditions are normal

and volatility is normal, we just have to be intellectually honest with ourselves that we're

probably going to have to be active and take

actions on the spread itself. What do we mean by that? Well, it basically means if one of these positions,

whether it's the long or the short side of the spread, presents itself as a winner, it means adding to the

winner. And if the other side presents itself as a loser, we reduce the losing position.

So this is the thought process that we're probably going to be going through in most situations.

Just applying a back of the envelope, given a distribution of returns analysis to a spread

and applying some sensible and realistic expectations and sensible and realistic stops

and targets and having a plan of action not just for our preventative risk management but also

for our reactive risk management as the trade evolves so we actually have a plan going into the trade.

So let's have a look at the numbers

and figure out the evolution of this trade

and the likely outcomes and actions we may have taken.

So at the start of the period on November 19, 2020,

the TREX stock price was $73.58 and the STZ stock price was $204.21.

And this gives us a spread value of negative $130.63.

If we applied a 10% stop loss to the negative $130.63. This would give us a stop loss level of

$143.69. We know by looking at the spread chart that this is a pretty

sensible stop loss in that it's wide enough

to give us a chance at making money,

but not wide enough that we're being human

and running a losing position

and seeking risk in a losing situation.

So pulling from box A,

where we either continue to run that position

or even worse, add to it.

If we apply our three-for-one of $13.69 on a three-for-one,

gives us $41.07, which gives us a target of $89.56.

Is that in the realms of possibility?

Yes, it is.

But it would have to, the spread would have to trade back towards March 2020 levels within the next 20 to 60 days.

Is it probable only if we're highly confident that either Trex or STZ or even both of them

are going to have a fundamental shift in the direction that we're calling?

And then how did this spread actually end up in February 2021?

Well, we know the outcome here. It ends up negative $120.61. So if we did enter at the level

on November 19 at negative $130.63.

By February, the trade would have been showing a profit

having done absolutely nothing.

So taken no actions at all on either stock,

a profit of $10.03 or a return of 7.67%.

So of course, this doesn't assume any actions taken at all on the spread, like adding to

Trex and or reducing STZ.

So, if you recall, when we looked at hard stops and soft targets on the individual stocks

and not on the spread, we had a soft target in TREX of $93.42 and a soft target in STZ of $155.20.

In a situation like this, which can be quite typical in periods of normal volatility and

normal market conditions, what we would likely be doing

is looking at the winning side of a spread

when we have the positions on.

And when the winning side of the spread

hits our soft target,

we would revert to a hard stop

and new target or price target two

on the winning position itself in the same way or the same action

that we highlighted earlier when we looked at trex hitting its soft target of 93.42 and applying the 8%

stop loss below the soft target, which at the time would have been the current stock price.

And we would probably be adding to that position. And at the same time, if the short is just a

losing position, we would probably be seeking to reduce the size of that position. So what we've

done here is entered a long and a short with a stop loss on the spread and a target on the spread.

But when the winning side of the trade presents itself,

we've added to the winning side of the trade

and we've reduced the position size

of the losing side of the trade.

And we've applied both hard stop losses and soft targets

on both sides of the trade at the same time.

Now, of course, with our example,

with Trex and STZ, this spread example,

it was the long side of the trade

that was the winning side of the trade and the short that was the losing side of the trade that was the winning side of the trade and the short that was

the losing side of the trade. There very obviously through time through many trades will be situations

where that's reversed. So you will put on spread trades where the long side ends up being the

losing side and the short side ends up being the winning side.

But the same approach applies that we've just been through.

If you have a situation where you've entered a spread, the spread goes in your favor,

but what's driving the value of the spread is the winning side on the short side. When the short side gets to a level of a soft target, which you've calculated from your distribution of returns analysis on the absolute value of the stock.

You would just take a similar action where you would add to the short, reduce the size of the long position and you would add

hard stop losses and targets to the new positions now when we look at this

spread we can actually categorize our example spread as a cross sector spread

trade so treks eight billion dollar market cap wood decking and railing sector

and constellation brands 42 billion dollar large cap uh it's an alcoholic beverages producer

so you can see this uh fits our remit of being long uh mid-cap stocks and short large-cap stocks.

And when you're building these portfolios, the example that we've just been through can

be quite typical in normal market conditions and in normal expansionary economic conditions.

and this is why we've used this example so in the future you know how to deal with these situations.

If we end up in a situation where we have a market reversal and you have a net long portfolio

where you have a number of mid-cap longs versus large-cap shorts, you need to make sure that you

have your preventative risk management in place and you're

actually active. So you're applying reactive risk management. It's not good enough, as mentioned

previously, to just have a situation where you have hard stop losses on all of your longs and you get

stopped out on all of your longs and and then you're just naked short everything.

And then you get caught out

because you have no longs in your portfolio

and the market goes up

and you get squeezed on all of your short positions.

By the same token, it's not good enough to have a situation

where your long mid caps, short large caps overall.

And in an expansionary phase, the market keeps going up. You have hard stop losses

on all your shorts. You get stopped out on all your shorts. And then the market goes back down

and all of your longs go down in value. This means you're just being whipsawed. You're opening

yourself up to potential large losses in your portfolio. And it's very obviously not a sensible approach

to apply right across the board.

So this is why we've shown you this example here

where when you're entering positions,

you can enter them initially

by applying a hard stop loss on spreads.

So the relative outperformance and underperformance

where you trade into both

and trade out of both at the same time at hard stop losses and if the individual stocks themselves

one presents itself as a winner one presents itself as a loser you add to the winner and reduce

the loser and again guys there is no absolute rule book here.

We really can't give you an instruction manual on what to do in every situation, in every stock, in every spread forever into the future.

Preventative risk management practices, when put in place, stop you from being human.

That's what we're trying to do here.

put in place stop you from being human that's what we're trying to do here but at the same time they do have limitations and you have to be reactive as well and reactive risk management just comes down

to experience so real money trading and being involved in multiple situations like this over time

so you can just as easily not have hard stop losses on the single

stock positions themselves and have what we call a mental stop loss on a spread within your portfolio

with also mental targets. Then you can see

to add to your winners, so pulling from box A, and reduce your losers, pulling from box B, when the single stocks break out or break down and also add hard stop losses at the same time.

target in absolute terms when we did our distribution of returns analysis for trex was $93.42. And when the stock actually gets to around that level, we could, for example, just add to the

trex and reduce the STZ at the same time. And the reason why we do that at the same time is because both positions are contingent on each other.

We are trading the relative outperformance and underperformance of two stocks relative to each other.

So when we take an action on one side, we're normally taking an action on the other side.

That's just best practice.

on the other side. That's just best practice. Now, what's interesting from a data perspective,

what you can actually do is use the distribution of returns analysis that we've shown you throughout the PTM video series and the IPLT video series. You can repeat this for the spread data as well using Excel. And you can calculate a reasonable hard stop and soft target

for the spread over the one to three month period. However, what you have to remember here is that

in reality, in practice, when you're doing this for real in your trading accounts,

this for real in your trading accounts. No brokerage platforms allow spread, stop losses, and targets to be applied on the platform. So you have to apply what we call mental stops and targets

and do everything yourself. So the best way to do this would be to obviously record your stops and targets in a spreadsheet, save them

on file, and if a spread does actually trade at your hard stop loss on the spread, you have to go

into the brokerage platform and trade out of both sides of the position. Conversely, when one of your winners presents itself and gets to an absolute soft target,

you have to go into your brokerage platform and take action on that position and also take

action on the other side of the spread as well.

So you would be most likely in all probability, remember this is not a rule, so don't follow this as a rule,

you would probably most likely be adding

to the winning side of a spread

and reducing the losing side of a spread.

And in the event that you have a situation

where the spread itself reaches the soft target for the entire spread,

you have to assess this situation where you look at both sides of the spread

and determine which action is the most likely situation you're going to be taking.

Because it could be the case that one side of the spread is driving the

value of the entire spread and you have one winner and one loser or one winner and one stock is flat

but you may have two winners as well and you may even want to add to both sides of the spread

again this is all situational and now we're getting into reactive risk management which

unfortunately just can't be taught in a video series it has to be taught for real or you have

to build up your experience over time in understanding the actions that you would take

in particular situations it really does just come down to getting live coaching,

live mentoring,

and or building up your experience

for reactive risk management.

But with preventative risk management,

it's all very straightforward.

We put preventative risk management parameters in place

like hard stops and soft targets on single stock

positions and also on spreads through volatility analysis and valuation analysis and this stops us

from being human so we don't take actions in our trading account that are going to hurt us in the long term.

Now, in this video, as we've been looking at hard stop losses and soft targets, and also

obviously our trading psychology as to why we even have them in place, we do have another

method of calculating hard stop losses and soft targets in addition to the distribution

of returns analysis. We have the ATRP, the Average True Range Percentage Analysis,

that we've looked at previously in the PTM and in the IPLT video series, and we can use this to set hard stop losses and soft targets as well. And the ATRP is a quicker analysis than the distribution of returns analysis.

ATRP gets us to quick answers and decent rough estimates for one to three month volatility

in setting sensible stop losses and realistic soft targets.

So we're not saying here that it presents a shortcut.

You should really be seeking to do both the ATRP analysis and the distribution of returns

analysis.

But at the end,

Admittedly, ATRP does get you to some pretty accurate answers, but the distribution of returns

analysis really does confirm the data, even though it's a longer and more tedious process

to go through, especially if trading is not actually your full-time job.

your full-time job so for retail traders part-time traders ATRP is good enough but if you do have the time or you do actually want to go and work in

the industry really knowing how to do the distribution of returns analysis is

going to help you that little bit more and that's the reason why we've been

through the distribution of returns analysis

in this video, so you fully understand the process. And what's going to happen next is that Chris Quill

is going to go through a spreadsheet class, both with the distribution of returns analysis

and the ATRP analysis in setting hard stop losses and soft targets.

So by the end of the next video, you will understand the technicalities

and the data dynamics of both approaches.

And what we've done here on the screen, you can see the ATRP analysis for both Trex and STZ,

both Trex and STZ, where we're trying to get an appreciation of volatility within the one to three month time horizon. And in the top row boxes, you can see that for both stocks, we're using weekly data.

helps us to set and understand a potential hard stop loss for both the individual stocks themselves and for the spread.

And in the bottom row, you can see the bottom row tables, you can see we're using quarterly

data over longer time horizons, which helps us understand the volatility within that time horizon parameter

of a quarter, which helps us in setting realistic targets for the 60-day time horizon, not only for

the individual stocks themselves, but also for a spread. So in the next video, Chris is actually

going to go through this with you so you understand it in a

bit more detail. So this has been a pretty long video, pretty intense in terms of the amount of

information to take in. So let's summarize here. We started off by showing you exactly why we would

have stop losses and targets in place at any one time in our portfolio.

And that is down to human psychology.

And pulling from box A and pulling from box B at the right times is absolutely critical to our long-term trading success.

without stop losses, some sort of stop loss across our portfolio positions and targets across our

portfolio of positions, without stops and targets in place, we open ourselves up to becoming victims

of human psychology. We can have tons and tons of good trade ideas and our timing can actually be quite good. However, if we don't

have a genuine understanding of a stock's volatility within our 20 to 60 day time horizon

and the odds of being stopped out or hitting our targets, then essentially we are trading blind

and we are trading without having a plan. If you do put yourself in that

situation when there's no understanding of any of this and there's no plan in place,

when a stock is moving around every day, week to week, you may get sucked in to being a human being and doing stupid things.

Now, as mentioned several times, and because of its importance, this point cannot be labored

enough.

Unfortunately, there is no one-size-fits-all model for setting hard stops and targets.

fits all model for setting hard stops and targets. So we are not telling you here that there is a solution for all situations. There's not a rule book. There just isn't. Everything is situational.

In a long short portfolio and in any market, it's about outperformance and underperformance of the assets that you're going

long and short. However, you always have to remember that we are absolute return traders

and we want to make money when markets go both up and down. That means on the way up,

if we know there's a good chance that we're going to get stopped out on shorts. We have to be active and take actions.

So we can either get better shorts that we think will actually go down.

So not sitting like a rabbit in the headlights and falling into a trap of just having a trading account that's full of lazy shorts as potential hedges, we can decide on many

occasions not to use hard stop losses and use spread or ratio stop losses. Or if we are using

a hard stop loss or hard stop losses in a lot of positions in our account,

we can replace them if we get stopped out on, for example, shorts with better shorts.

Now, of course, the reverse applies.

So if the market is going down the same way,

Best practices apply to long positions in a bear market.

Now, if you think about a situation where you already have a live portfolio in place

and you're thinking about adding a position to that portfolio,

then it's a pretty straightforward exercise to model spread and ratio stops

and implement them when you already have a live

portfolio. So for example, when you're planning to add a short position to a portfolio, you can

select a long position in the portfolio and work out the stop and target for the spread and then take them off together if the spread stop is hit

and or you can run the whole spread as it moves in your favor and you can potentially add to the

whole spread you can add to the winning side of the spread and reduce a losing side of the spread you can revert to hard

stop losses on the stock prices individually or you can roll the stop loss on the entire spread

it should be obvious now that there's multiple things you can do and that there is no rule book here that fits all situations perfectly.

This is a judgment call that has to be made by you on the situation itself at the time.

You have to focus on the process here so you get good at appraising volatility and setting sensible stop losses and reasonable targets,

realistic targets, and then just implement these processes over many situations over a

long period of time so you get the experience.

Above all else, you just have to be intellectually honest with yourself about the statistical data and implement the plan that's most likely to be optimal for risk versus reward.

So, guys, obviously, a lot to take in there in terms of human psychology, trader psychology, and also stops and targets preventative risk management.

You've now got a very good understanding of the theory behind all of this and also having

a look at some practical examples, understanding how it works in practice.

What we're going to do now is go over to Chris Quill in the next video.

What we're going to do now is go over to Chris Quill in the next video.

And what Chris is going to show you, he's going to give you a spreadsheet class on how to actually calculate distribution of returns and ATRP in order to assess volatility for setting returns.

hard stops and targets for single stock positions and mental stops and targets for spreads and also

portfolio stop losses. Chris is going to obviously use real data in his analysis, but what he'll be

doing is using a theoretical long short stock portfolio to just highlight the preventative risk management

steps that you can take and engage in to limit your dollar losses and maximize dollar gains.

So essentially to maximize your R score in your trading accounts. So what he's also going to go through is preventative risk

management measures like gross exposure limits, cash for cash net exposure limits, and beta

adjusted net exposure limits. And on top of that, he's also going to set out some realistic

long-term targets for your R scorescore and your percentage win rate and percentage

loss rate. So you're going to get a full statistical masterclass here in preventative

risk management. So instead of going back to the desk at this stage, let's just shoot

straight into the next video and I'll see you at the end of the next video. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you.