Okay everybody, welcome back to the computer screen. Welcome to video number

six of the Professional Trading Masterclass video series. This is going to be a very long video.

The first part of the video will be covered by myself and second part, which is very long, we're going to be doing a

spreadsheet plus an Excel lesson with Christopher Quill. In video six, we are going to introduce

you now to an accessory to what we've learned so far relating to bond market leading indicators.

relating to bond market leading indicators. We're going to be looking at the money supply.

But before we do introduce money supply into our analysis and framework,

what I want to do is just have a quick recap and understand how everything fits together. You know, at this stage, last

couple of videos, we've covered obviously a lot of information. It's a lot

to digest and take in and sometimes it's because there's so many moving parts, it

can be quite difficult to grasp how everything fits together. So let's look at this.

What have we covered up to this point in the previous two videos?

Well, we covered government and sovereign bond markets and the corporate bond markets.

And what did we actually achieve out of that?

What did we get?

And what did we actually achieve out of that? What did we get? Well, we've now got several useful leading indicators for predicting a number of dynamics that are important to traders and portfolio managers.

So what are these dynamics that we're always trying to predict at any one moment in time? Well, it's the government and corporate bond market,

first of all, in terms of liquidity and money flows.

And these dynamics are leading dynamics, okay?

And we are using leading indicators in the bond market

to predict these dynamics. What else are we trying

to predict in terms of dynamics? Well, we're trying to predict stock market liquidity and also stock

market volatility and stock market direction and possible returns. Why? Because we want to form a macroeconomic view, which essentially forms our portfolio bias.

So, government and corporate bond market, liquidity and market.

money flows, stock market liquidity and volatility, and stock market direction and possible returns

are all leading dynamics that we are trying to predict. What are they leading? They are leading

corporate earnings growth. So the corporate Outlook, that's our own expectation of the future growth of corporate earnings and leading economic growth, so leading GDP.

So both stock market corporate earnings and GDP growth are both lagging dynamics.

Now, as we are long-short equity portfolio managers, we are located in the stock

market. We are not necessarily taking positions in bond market instruments. We are taking positions

in the stock market and we are expressing our portfolio bias via the stock market and stocks.

So what we really care about here is stock market liquidity and volatility and

stock market direction and possible returns.

From the bot market, we get our leading indicators that predict these dynamics. We get leading indicators to predict dynamics that are

leading corporate earnings and GDP growth. What were they? Well, we know what they are. Real interest

rates, the yield curve, that's in the government bond market and investment grade, high yield or junk spreads over the 10-year, that's in the corporate bond market.

And we combine these leading indicators with a leading indicator in the stock market, which is stock market volatility,

the S&P 500 fix, which was covered in the IPLT video series. Now we also mentioned and covered Fed outlook

and policy. So what the Federal Reserve is doing. We discussed and covered that

these leading indicators they are always being monitored by the Federal Reserve as indicators of expected economic growth.

The Fed itself has a self-mandated target for annual inflation and unemployment in the US economy.

This is what's called the dual mandate. And at the time of writing, which is 2021, or at the time of recording, the Fed's official

target for inflation is 2%, with an expected real GDP growth rate of 3.3% in 2022, and the

and 2.2% in 2023.

Now, we also learned that the Fed intentionally intervenes

in the money markets to manipulate the supply of funds

via both conventional and non-conventional methods.

And up to this point,

the conventional method that we've covered is via interest rates. So via the interest

rate mechanism. The Fed intervenes in the money markets to manipulate the supply of funds via

interest rates. But they also do this via money supply, which is considered a conventional policy from the Fed. So the conventional monetary

policy tools that the Fed uses to manipulate the supply of funds is interest rates and the money

supply. Non-conventional means, so non-conventional tools that the Fed uses,

would be things like asset purchase programs. Now, both conventional and non-conventional

tools that the Fed uses, what are they using them for? Well, it's obviously to intervene in the money markets to manipulate liquidity.

But the reason for this is to manage inflation and economic growth.

So at this stage, we bring in the money supply as a conventional tool.

the money supply as a conventional tool. And we have to understand the money supply as a conventional tool used by the Fed. But what we also do is, is we add the Fed's actions,

what the Fed is doing with their policy. We add the Fed actions into our Dynamics predictor list.

So we add it to the predictor list where we had previously government and corporate bond

liquidity and money flows, stock market liquidity and volatility, direction and possible returns of the stock market, we add the Federal

Reserve policy and outlook to our dynamics predictor list. Why? Because the Fed is

looking at what we look at. Now, how the Fed behaves with these tools can both be leading and lagging as a dynamic.

Why?

Because the Fed, when they're looking at the same stuff we're looking at, they can strike preemptively.

They can take advantage.

measures very quickly and timely in order to prevent economic issues.

Okay.

Or they can actually sit back and they can react later to economic situations.

So what would be an example of the Fed having a preemptive policy response? and they're seeing the beginning of some stresses appearing, what they may do is use either conventional or non-conventional tools

to actually prevent further stresses occurring.

That would be a very quick and timely response.

What would be an example of a lagging or reactive policy measure?

Well, that could be, for example, on the flip side. So let's say we've had a very, very long period

of strong economic growth. We've been in a very long expansionary phase

economic growth. We've been in a very long expansionary phase with high levels of inflation,

for example. Well, a Fed lagging response could be to actually leave it a very long time and allow the expansion to keep going and keep interest rates low, keep money supply ticking over and high and not raise interest rates in response to inflation,

for example, potentially getting out of control. So they may be happy to sit back and allow inflation and economic growth to continue for a long time and not have a policy response of higher interest rates, but allow higher interest rate policy to lag by a fairly long period of time.

Another example of lagging or reactive policy from the Fed may be in response to some sort

of exogenous shock.

So, for example, like COVID in 2020, when we have an immediate liquidity crisis that was pretty much unforeseen or unexpected.

And the Fed comes in with both conventional and non-conventional means and takes huge action in reaction to the exit

jealous event. So, of course, we as traders and portfolio managers are always

trying to stay on top via our leading indicators. We are always trying to stay

on top of both government and corporate bond liquidity and money flows, on top of

stock market liquidity, stock market volatility and the direction and possible

returns of the stock market using our leading indicators. But we also have to

introduce the dynamic in the predictor list of the Fed because they are looking

at the same stuff we are looking at and they could enact a policy response that's either very timely and leading, so preemptive, or non-timely and lagging, reactive.

We must be on top of Fed policy and outlook and also their intentions for both conventional and non-conventional monetary policy.

At an absolute minimum, we have to be on top of a number of things.

So, the official interest rate, money supply growth.

This is where money supply now fits in.

Money supply is a conventional monetary tool used by the Fed. We have to be on top of what the Fed's

target inflation rate is, what the Fed is expecting GDP growth to be going

forward. We have to be on top of the FOMC, the Federal Open Market Committee

meetings calendar for setting interest

rates. These are the Fed meetings that are held eight times a year to decide on the level of

interest rates. We also need to be on top of Fed language for expected interest rate moves in the

future. The bond market reacts to that. The minutes of these meetings, of

the Fed meetings, are released three weeks after interest rate policy

decisions and we need to be on top of the press conferences. So this is interest

rates and conventional monetary policy outlook. We also have to be on top of the

Fed's non-conventional policy, so the size and speed

of asset purchase programs, and also the language for expected future changes in those asset purchase

programs. These are non-conventional monetary policy tools, so at a minimum, we have to be on top of these things.

The leading indicators and the dynamics that we're trying to predict with those leading indicators,

they are being watched by the Fed as well. And Fed policy

can change our view on the leading indicators

and therefore our view on the dynamic predictors.

If, for example, we are using our leading indicators

to predict stock market direction and possible returns,

and from our leading indicators,

we become, for example, very bearish on the stock market.

And we think to ourselves, we need to have a short portfolio bias.

Well, guess what?

The Fed is looking at the same things too.

And a Fed policy response that's leading, so preemptive, a timely preemptive response can actually change

those dynamics very quickly. So we have to be on top of these things very

obviously as a dynamic. And on the flip side, if we're looking at our leading

indicators and we're extremely bullish, We have a net long portfolio bias in our trading

portfolio and the stock market, everything seems really good. Everything seems really

strong. We're getting the right direction of positive and the returns in the market are strong.

What happens if we get overly bullish and then the Fed has some sort of reactive

or even preemptive response to that where inflation might be getting too high, expectations of economic growth are getting

overheated or out of control, and the Fed has some sort of combination of conventional

and non-conventional policy response. Well, our dynamic is going to change, okay?

Well, our dynamic is going to change.

The leading indicators can be affected by that very quickly.

The predictor list can change very quickly.

And the Fed is responsible for those changes.

So in all scenarios here, at any one moment in time, we have to be on top of what the Fed is doing.

But don't worry, there's lots of resources and links that we can utilize to stay on top of this

stuff. If you go to the downloads area underneath this video, you'll see a PDF

that we've put together with a whole bunch of resources and links to help you out

in the future in staying on top of Fed, Outlook and Policy. Just as a reminder and a visual here, if you

you think back to the beginning of the video series when we were looking at the

overall framework and understanding what we're trying to do here in terms of

predicting GDP and how the S&P 500 the stock market leads corporate earnings

and leads GDP. Just a reminder as a visual of what we're trying to achieve here.

So it's better for you or helpful for you to understand how everything fits in. So we're

obviously using our leading indicators to predict stock market liquidity and volatility, direction and possible returns.

And they are leading the lagging indicators,

which are economic growth,

the stock market corporate earnings

that are reported every quarter.

So the same as GDP, which is reported every quarter. But these two indicators

are lagging and also inflation is lagging as well. Those indicators are telling you what happened

in the past, but the stock market trades every day. Okay. So we are utilizing the stock market and stocks to predict the direction

and possible returns of the leading indicators

and also from Fed policy and outlook.

From this, we are achieving our portfolio bias

of either being net long, net short,

or neutral in our portfolio.

So now that we've got a better understanding

of how everything

fits in, in terms of our list of dynamic predictors and also leading indicators

and where, for example, Fed policy and outlook fits in, we can now add our second conventional monetary policy tool, M2 Money Supply.

So we're bringing in money supply as a leading indicator,

but more defined as an accessory leading indicator,

alongside our leading indicators that we've looked at so far.

So real interest rates in the yield curve, in the government bond market,

investment grade and high yields or junk spreads over the 10 year. So

So in the corporate bond market and the S&P 500 VIX index, which was in the IPLT video series for predicting stock market volatility.

So M2 money supply, we're bringing in now as an accessory leading indicator. And really, it's an accessory leading indicator because over

the years, money supply growth, which is the important factor that we're looking

at, money supply growth and the changing dynamic of the monetary mechanism and

specifically the velocity of money, so how quickly money makes its way through the economy.

That's changed in terms of strength and predictability with leading economic growth over time.

over time. Okay, so it's quite difficult to draw very meaningful conclusions in terms of correlations between money supply growth and economic growth and

stock market returns. But there is a very, very good way of looking at money supply growth in that it is a conventional Federal Reserve monetary policy tool that is still utilised very actively by the Fed.

And the best way to understand it is to think of it in terms of liquidity and the intentions of the Federal Reserve.

So we can use money supply growth, M2 money supply growth, as if you like a confirmation indicator,

even though it's really defined as a leading indicator in that money supply does lead economic growth to varying degrees throughout history.

As traders and PMs, what we want to be doing is using it as an accessory, as a confirmation indicator, so a confirming leading indicator of Fed policy. So for example, in a period of expansion where

Fed policy in our other leading indicator space is an easing bias where we have lower interest rates,

short end of the yield curve is being manipulated in some way by a conventional or

non-conventional means, a normal yield curve exists. The corporate bond market is looking

healthy. But we look at, for example, M2 money supply, and we see the Fed reducing money

supply. This would be at odds to what we're seeing in the government and corporate bond markets.

And this might raise some questions from traders and PMs that the Fed may actually be tapering.

Now, look at it on the other side, on the flip side.

on the other side, on the flip side,

what would happen, for example,

if we were in an expansionary phase and we saw the Fed starting to print more money

in terms of M2 money supply growth.

So we start seeing abnormal activity from the Fed. Well, it might mean that

they're seeing something that we've not seen, and that could be quite worrying. So we're not

trying to look at money supply growth here and trying to correlate it exactly with a certain level of GDP growth or stock market returns.

What we're doing is here, we're using it as a confirmation leading indicator of Fed policy.

And whether we see what's going on in the bond market is consistent with M2 money supply growth.

So are the Fed's actions consistent or are they potentially changing?

Now, Chris Quill is going to teach you all about M2 money supply growth

in a spreadsheet class that's coming up very soon.

But let's understand the definition of money supply here.

And there's various definitions of money.

There's N1 and there's M2 definition of money.

M1 as a definition only includes cash and checking deposits. M2 definition of money is a calculation that includes M1,

so all the elements of M1, cash and checking deposits,

as well as what we call in financial markets, NIA money.

NIA money refers to savings deposits, money market securities, mutual funds, and other time deposits.

It's a measure of the money supply that includes both cash and checking deposits, so M1 and M1.

near money, which is anything that's easily convertible into cash. M2 is therefore a broader

measure of the money stock and the M1 money supply. M2 and M2 growth is an accessory leading indicator to future inflation and liquidity in the economy

and as a target of central bank monetary policy. So what are we doing as traders and PMs, we are looking at money supply growth, utilizing the M2 definition of cash and checking

deposits, M1, plus near money as an accessory leading indicator to future inflation in the

economy and liquidity in both the economy and financial markets.

And of course, as a tool that's used by the Federal Reserve, who are using it as a tool

to manipulate liquidity and inflation in the economy.

And from that, we are drawing conclusions

of either confirmation or denial of what's occurring

in bond markets when we're looking at our other leading indicators

and Fed policy in both the government

and corporate bond markets.

Now the data set for the M2 money stock

is a big data set.

It goes back many years and it's very useful.

Very useful in looking at money supply growth over time and understanding

what is normal and what is abnormal. What we've got in the downloads area is a spreadsheet

titled US M2 Money Supply Template. And what this is, is a template of M2 money supply growth. And the reason we

calculate this is to assess money supply growth throughout time and understand what is normal

money supply growth and what is abnormal. Now, as a student of the PTM video series, and generally in financial markets,

the method that we use is a distribution of returns analysis,

which viewers of the IPLT video series will have seen before.

When we looked at

using the method to determine volatility in various asset classes.

As a student of PTM and of financial markets in general,

you have to practice using the distribution of returns analysis

because it can be applied to many situations in financial markets.

And in this situation, we can apply exactly the same method

to measuring M2 money supply growth.

So analyzing Fed actions to stimulate liquidity, inflation, and GDP growth

in the money market, okay, in the money market utilizing M2 money supply.

So we download the data, we download the M2 money supply data through a statistical analysis, we analyze M2 money supply growth.

And from that, we can infer Federal Reserve actions to stimulate liquidity, inflation, and GDP growth.

So, Chris Quill is going to show you now how to do this distribution of returns analysis for the M2 money supply data.

Chris will apply that same method that we used in the IPLT video series on US M2 data.

And this video is pretty long guys. He goes into great detail of how to do this at every step.

Chris will be with us throughout the video series,

doing a lot of spreadsheet classes.

And yeah, just pay attention and practice these methods.

At first, it will be time consuming, it will be new,

it might be a little difficult and tricky to memorize and internalize all of the steps and processes

that you need to go through to do this.

But don't worry, over time, with a lot of practice, you'll get much, much quicker and more efficient at doing this. And don't forget, the spreadsheet in the downloads area

is a template.

So you can actually just learn the template,

understand the dynamics of how it works,

and then update the template regularly

when data comes out.

So let's go over to Chris now,

and I'll see you in the next video.

Hi guys, welcome to your first spreadsheet class of this course. My name is Chris Quill and I'm

the Institute's Quantitative Analyst. Throughout this course you're going to be seeing me crop

up occasionally to teach you some quantitative methods that are important to understand when it

comes to trading and managing your own portfolios. We're always going to be using Excel for our

analysis so there's no requirement for any programming knowledge or anything like that

and for your reference I'm going to be using Excel 2016 throughout. So depending on the version of

Excel that you have the layout and the processes that you need to use might be very slightly different, although that is unlikely.

But if you do get stuck, then you can just use Google to find the answer to the differences that you see in certain processes between your version of Excel and the 2016 version that I have.

Okay, so in this video, I'm going to show you how to analyze money supply data

for the US and this spreadsheet that you guys see in front of you now is where we're headed. Basically

you're going to learn how to build something like this yourselves and this spreadsheet basically

analyzes M2 money supply growth for the US. Now when it comes to money supply it can be a little bit

complicated to use as a leading indicator but we're going to keep it simple as much as possible

and stick to some basic economic principles when going through our assessment. And if you look at

money supply historically, money supply growth, it's had a pretty dynamic relationship with GDP in the stock market

so it's not necessarily easy to draw conclusions about correlations or anything like that and the

reason for that is basically that things like market mechanisms and the velocity of money has

changed over time. The velocity of money being you know how quickly money circulates around the economy and how effectively it's used.

That being said, it is important that you guys understand that money supply is one of the tools used by the Fed to stimulate the economy and markets.

And the best way to think about that is in terms of liquidity.

When markets and the economy are illiquid or expected liquidity decreases, the Fed tries to step in to plug the void by increasing money supply growth.

So we can use interest rates, which you guys have been through in previous videos, and the

price of money as leading indicators that tell you about future economic expectations.

And we can combine that with M2 money supply as an accessory

gauge to understand Fed expectations or reactions regarding liquidity. Realistically what we're most

concerned with here is the level of M2 prints on a month-to-month basis and trying to understand

whether they're within what we would call a normal range or not. Particularly

we're concerned about the higher end and you'll understand more about this as I go through the

video but if you see high M2 prints it's a signal that the Fed is trying to stimulate

the economy and markets through increases in liquidity and it needs to

prompt questions for you guys, such as, you know, does this confirm what I'm seeing across money

markets and other leading indicators? And if not, what is the Fed seeing that I'm not? So the analysis

we're going to do in this video is similar to that which you'll be familiar with from the IPLT series

and it involves analyzing the distribution of a data set. Now in the introduction

to professional level trading masterclass we did this for various financial assets to understand

risk, opportunity and volatility on a historical basis. Here what we're going to do is carry out

something similar for M2 money supply data in order to understand and look out for abnormal changes in the data.

For those of you guys who have done the IPLT course already, you've got a bit of a head start here,

but there will be plenty of new concepts introduced in this video as well.

For the rest of you that haven't, I strongly recommend going through that process in the

Introduction to Professional Level Trading Masterclass course.

Not only does the IPLT act as a solid foundation for everything we cover in this video series, but particularly with the distribution of returns videos, it's very important for you to understand how and why you should carry out that analysis for financial assets because it sets the seam for your entire trading process.

As a brief outline of what we're going to cover in this video, basically I'm going to show

you how to gather M2 money supply data for the US and build out an analysis for that data

in Excel like you can see here.

We'll look at how to define and identify what constitutes abnormal growth in the money supply

and draw some conclusions as to what that

means, some of which I've already touched on. Finally, I'll show you a template spreadsheet

which is accessible in the downloads area for this video. That's actually what we're looking at here

at the moment and that will save you a lot of time in Excel since it updates all the analysis

automatically whenever you add in new data.

That being said, it's still very important that you guys know how to do all of this from scratch

so that you understand how all the calculations work, what they're useful for and what their

limitations are. So we've got a lot to cover in this video, get yourselves a coffee, strap in

and let's get started. Now with any data analysis problem,

the first stage is always outlining our aim, figuring out what data we need and then getting

hold of that data. So our aim here is to analyse changes in the US M2 money supply on the basis

that from our economic understanding, we think large increases are aimed at stimulating the

economy and financial markets

through a provision of liquidity, whether that be on a pre-emptive basis or through reactive decisions

from the Fed. We want to be able to see when these increases happen and calculate what constitutes large

abnormal changes. So the data we're going to be using for this analysis is nominal seasonally

adjusted monthly M2 money supply data from the Federal Reserve which includes cash, checking

deposits and other liquid easily convertible assets. To find this data we just need to navigate to the

Federal Reserve Economic Database website. So in my web browser here I've just navigated to the URL fred.stlouisfed.org,

that is the Federal Reserve Economic Database website and from here we can just search for

whatever we want in this search bar to find the data that we need. So I'm just going to put in

this search bar M2 and then click the search icon on the right hand side. You can also press enter

M2 and then click the search icon on the right hand side. You can also press enter

and once you do that the website will return a list of data series that are relevant to your search term. You can see from the third option here we've got M2 money stock. That's billions of dollars

measured in billions of dollars. It's weekly and non-seasonally adjusted and it goes back

to 1980. You'll also see a link below that option for two other formats of this data series so if

we click on that we can see that there's two monthly series available here again in billions

of dollars. One is seasonally adjusted and one is not and they both go back to 1959. So there's two reasons that we are going to pick

monthly seasonally adjusted data as opposed to you know weekly non-seasonally adjusted data here

and that's firstly and most importantly because it's a lot harder to pick out what constitutes

abnormal moves when the data isn't seasonally adjusted. So in this case

we need the monthly data for that. We could work around that issue with weekly data if we applied

seasonal adjustments ourselves but frankly that isn't as easy as it sounds and it's beyond the

scope of what you guys need to understand and learn in this video. So that's why the first reason why

the monthly series makes sense. The second one is

that we've got a lot longer data series to take advantage of here. It goes back to 1959 so we've

got more data to look at and understand what makes a move, a certain percentage change in the data,

abnormal or not. So we can just click on that link for the monthly season the adjusted data

it then takes us to a new page for that data series and you can see it's plotted on a chart here and

you can edit the chart or edit the length of the series but by default it's going to show you the

entire history and we don't want to make any clever changes to this data we just want

to download the series as is. So we can just go to the download button at the top right hand side there

click that and download this data to Excel. What you'll do then or what the website does then is download

downloads this data to your PC in Excel format.

You can see on my screen here that's created a link to this Excel sheet that it's downloaded

in the bottom left.

I'm using Google Chrome as my web browser on a Windows PC.

So that's just the way that I can quickly open links to newly downloaded files.

For you guys it might be different, it might be in your downloads folder or whatever.

It doesn't really matter, you just need to navigate to that file and open it.

When you open the file you might see a protected view warning at the top in a yellow bar. You can

just ignore that and click on enable editing and if we take a look at the data that we've got here

what you can see is we've got dates in ascending order in column A so running

down the column and we've got the corresponding monthly M2 values in column B to all of the dates

that we observe in column A. Okay so now we have this M2 data we can tidy up the spreadsheet a

little bit by deleting unnecessary cells,

renaming our columns and also adjusting the format of our dates. What I'm going to

start with is renaming our column for our M2 monthly data. You can see at the

moment in cell B11 we have a title here that is M2SL that is pretty meaningless

to us at the moment. What I think is a much better title

is the one that we see in cell B8. So what I'm going to do is copy this title from cell B8 down

to cell B11. To do that you can either select the cell and then right click within the selection and

go to copy and then do the same for pasting it into cell B11 or you can just select cell B8, press Ctrl C on

the keyboard as I've just done there and then select B11 and press Ctrl V on the keyboard.

Okay so now we've got a suitable date for our M2 monthly data that we can see in cell B11 there.

What I now want to do is delete all of the rows from row 1 to 10

because they're pretty unnecessary for us. We just want our column titles and all the data below so

basically everything we see in row 11 and beyond. So to delete the top 10 rows I'm just going to

left click and drag over the row numbers on the left hand side from row

1 to row 10 and then right click in that selection and go to delete and that will delete all

of those rows.

Okay so now there's a couple more things I want to do.

First of all I want to make our column titles bold so I'm going to click and drag, left

click and drag over cells A1 and B1 which are the cells for our column titles and make these bold by pressing control B on the keyboard.

You can also do this by navigating to the home tab on the ribbon and just clicking on this bold button here.

the keyboard shortcuts a little bit easier and they'll be useful for you guys to learn as well.

Let's look at all of our dates in column A for a moment and we can see that all of these dates

are a little bit ambiguous probably depending on where you're based in the world because people

read these date formats slightly differently. Sometimes they'll read this as the year followed

by the month then the day, sometimes they'll read this as the year followed by the month then the

day. Sometimes they'll read this as the year followed by the day and then the month. So to clear

up any ambiguity I'm going to change the formats of all the dates that we see in column A and I'm

going to do that by left-clicking the column letter at the top so column A and then right-clicking in

that selection and going to format cells.

So we're going to format all of the dates that we observe in column A here. So in this format cells

dialog box I'm going to go to custom as a category and then overwrite the type as general and overwrite

it instead with the following format dd hyphen or dash mmm-yy. And when I press OK you'll see what that does to the date

formats in that column. We've now quite clearly got the day followed by the month followed by the

year. And we can see from these observations that the data is on a monthly basis and it's observed on the first of

every month. Now in actual fact if you read about the monthly M2 data that you download from the

Federal Reserve Economic Database, despite this saying this is from the first of each month,

the actual corresponding data is an average over that entire month. So if we from the first of each month, the actual corresponding data is an average

over that entire month. So if we take the first data that we have here, so what we can read

here is the first of January 1959. It says our M2 money stock monthly season, the adjusted

value in billions of dollars is 286.6. In actual fact, that is the average value over the entire month of January in 1959.

It doesn't really affect things for our analysis but I just wanted to point that out to you

guys.

If you want to quickly navigate to the bottom of the spreadsheet just to make sure that you

know your formatting changes have worked or anything like that, a quick shortcut to do

that is just to press Ctrl down on the keyboard. That will take you to the end of the data

series in whatever column you're in, so the bottom of the data series. You can of

course also use the scroll bar on the right-hand side as well and you can use

the scroll bar going from left to right here as well. If you want to scroll to

the top or the right hand side or the left hand

side very quickly, as I said, a shortcut is using Ctrl and the arrow keys. So if I want

to go back to the top, I can just press Ctrl and up on the keyboard.

A final change that I want to make to our headings

here is just to wrap the text. At the moment you can see in cell B1 our column heading is quite long

so it goes outside the bounds of that cell. I just want to wrap this text so that instead of going

outside the bounds of the cell it just goes down rows and stays within the cell borders. I'll show

you what I mean in a second so let me select,-click and select cells A1 and B1 and then within the home tab click on wrap text and you

can see when I do that it basically wraps all the text onto different lines

within the confines of a certain cell. Okay now we've made some changes I want to

make sure this file is saved

somewhere on my PC so that I can access this analysis whenever I wish. So I'm

just going to go to file, save as and browse and then just browse a folder on

my PC that makes sense to save this file into. Okay, so this will be different

for you guys but I'm just going to put it in this folder into. Okay, so this will be different for you guys

But I'm just going to put it in this folder here. I suggest you make sure that you save the file type as an XLSX, Excel workbook and

You know make it a sensible file name. So I'm just going to put in US

M2 USM2 analysis here and then click save and that will save the file into that folder. Finally now

before we move on to the next section let's just quickly rename this worksheet. At the moment you

can see this worksheet is called Fred Graph. Let's just right click on that sheet name down here and go to rename and

then just type over with something more sensible. So I'm going to rename this

from fredgraph to m2 distribution. So that will be our new sheet name for this

worksheet that we're in right now. Let's pause now for a moment and take a look

at this data that we have in a line chart. The easiest way to do

that is to select the column of data that we want to plot, so column B in this instance, and then go

to insert on the ribbon and then choose a 2D line chart from this option here and we can choose the

top left 2D line chart option. And you can see when we do that that that creates a

chart, plots a line with the data that we've selected and automatically gives

that chart a title equal to whatever we set the column heading to so the value

that we've entered into cell B1 in this case. Let's tidy up this chart a little

bit though because at the moment you can see on the x axis that we've just got a sequence of numbers rather than the associated dates for this monthly M2 data.

To change that, we just right click within this chart selection and go to select data.

and you'll see then that we have a select data source dialog box appear.

And we just want to edit the horizontal or category axis label.

So we can click on this edit button here.

And then in this new dialog box, we just select all of our dates from cell A2,

the first observation date, down to the end of the data set.

Now, the easiest way to do that is select cell A2 there and then press Ctrl+Shift+Down so Ctrl+Shift+Down on the

keyboard and that will automatically select all of the cells down to the

bottom of the data series in that column so all of our dates. Then we can

press OK. Another way to do that, by the way, is just left clicking and dragging down that whole column as well.

You can do that equally if you don't remember the keyboard shortcut.

But these keyboard shortcuts, as I said,

will save you a lot of time if you do remember them.

So press OK there and OK again.

And we can scroll back to the top of the spreadsheet.

And you'll see now that we've got corresponding dates

for all of our monthly M2 values there.

So that chart captures all of the data down to row 746.

That's all the data that we selected.

If you wanted the chart to capture new data

that you'll be inputting into the spreadsheet,

then you'd need to change the cell references so that they capture data a lot further down the spreadsheet. And I'm not going to cover

how to do that just here, but this is something that you will see in the spreadsheet template

that I show you later in the video and also that you've got access to in the downloads area.

Now, if you want to move the chart,'s very simple all you need to do is left

click on the chart area and drag that chart around the sheet as you wish and

equally if you want to resize the chart with the chart area selected you'll see

some nodes appearing around the edges and you can click and drag any of those

nodes outwards or inwards to resize the chart. If you want to reduce or increase text sizes of the axis titles or chart

title then you just need to left click on whatever element you want and then go to the home tab and

either increase or decrease the text size to whatever you want. So I'm going to do that for

the title text just now just reduce that text size a little bit. Other aesthetic changes that you can

make are things like altering the color of the chart area or any text element for that matter,

as well as the style and color of the data line that you have in the chart.

To change the color of these various chart elements you just need to left click the chart

element that you wish and use the fill color or text color buttons on the home tab so for example i can change the chart

color to dark blue by selecting the entire chart area and then selecting a dark blue color in the home

in the fill color option on the home tab.

And we can then change all of our titles,

so all of the text in the chart to white

because now obviously we can't see the text as easily

if it stays in a dark color.

So I'll do that just now quickly.

Probably the easiest way to remember how to make any changes

like this is knowing that you can just select the chart and go to format on the ribbon.

From there you can then select any element of the chart that you want and use the options

available to you on the ribbon to make changes.

So for example, I'll quickly just make two more changes now.

I'm going to make the grid lines dark blue.

So I'm selecting the grid lines here and then changing the color to dark blue so I'm selecting the grid lines here and then

changing the color to dark blue and then I'll change the data line to a light

yellow so I'm just selecting the data line that we have for our M2 monthly

data and changing that to a light yellow color. Okay so we took a bit of a

detour there but I think it's good to show you guys the flexibility of Excel in its ability to present data. So hopefully you get the idea there. Let's actually consider the data that we're looking at now.

would expect with a growing economy and inflation. What we want to know though is what the rate of change of this money supply is over shorter periods such as monthly and yearly intervals,

since that's going to give us an insight into the expansionary pressures being applied by the central

bank at any time. So let's continue by calculating monthly and yearly percentage rates of change to M2 money supply.

What we're going to do in column C is calculate our M2 month-on-month percentage change values.

And in column D, we're going to calculate our year-on-year percentage change values for m2. Okay so in cell C1 I'm just going to title this column m2 mom percent that stands for

month on month percentage change for m2. In cell D1 I'm going to title column D with m2

yoy year on year percentage change. Okay so there are column titles. Next we want to run our

calculations. So we're just going to calculate for every value that we see in

column B for our M2 money stock the percentage change from the previous value

on a month-on-month basis in column C. So I'm going to start in cell Z3. Whenever

we type a formula in Excel it always starts with equals so I'm going to start in cell Z3. Whenever we type a formula in Excel, it always starts with equals.

So I'm going to type equals, then reference the February 59 value for M2.

Divide that by the January 59 value for M2 and minus one.

And that is a formula that will calculate the percentage change between January 59 and

February 59 for M2 money stock.

You might have seen that written in a slightly different format before.

For example, you can also in brackets write it in this form.

So the February value minus the January value divided by the January value.

Okay, it's the same thing so I'll stick to the one

that I wrote previously B3 divided by B2 minus 1. Okay when I press enter there

that calculates the month-on-month percentage change in M2 from January

59 to February 59 and what we're then going to do is basically copy that

formula down on a relative basis so it references the different cells that it needs to as we copy it down all the way to

the bottom of the data series.

And the easiest way to do that in Excel is clicking on the formula cell that we've just

calculated and then double clicking in the bottom right hand corner of that cell selection

the little green square and when we double click that you'll see

that it basically very quickly copies down the formulas appropriately to the end of the data

series. We can check the formulas quite easily. If we go to the bottom of the data series and just

double click into this final cell here, cell C746, you'll see that it's still using the right formula to calculate month on month percentage

change so in this case it's calculating the percentage change between December 2020 and

January 2021. Okay so that's our month on month percentage data done for year on year it's almost

exactly the same it's just we're changing the cell

references about. So bearing in mind here our first data point is in January 59 okay. So our first

year on year percentage change that we can calculate would be in January 1960. So that would be in this

corresponding cell here d14. So I'm going to start this off with an equal

sign so it's another formula and we're just going to calculate the percentage change between the

value we see for M2 on January 1960 divided by the value we see for January 1959 minus one. Okay

that's our year on year percentage change and we can copy that formula

down in exactly the same way to the end of the sheet and we can check it and see that it's still

referencing the right cells. Okay let's go back to the top of the spreadsheet now and we'll just make

these column titles bold so I'm selecting cells C1 and D1 and just pressing ctrl b to make those titles

bold and then I'm going to select the entirety of columns C and D and format all the values the

numbers that we see in these columns to percentages to two decimal places because at the moment they're all in decimal

formats. So I'm left clicking and dragging over the column letters C and D to select the entire

columns. Right clicking in the selection going to format cells. In this dialog box we're going to

click on percentage category and leave the decimal places to two decimal places. Okay and press

okay here and then you'll see that all of those decimals have been reformatted to display themselves as percentages.

What we can also do now is just very quickly change the width of these columns because they are unnecessarily wide at the moment.

Quite a quick way to do that is just by clicking, left clicking and dragging the intersection between columns to make them wider or narrower.

So we'll just do that for those two columns, make them both a little bit narrow or narrower

and that tidies up our sheet a little bit.

Okay so now we've got some monthly and yearly rates of change data calculated in columns

C and D. Let's compute some statistics to describe those columns of data and we'll

understand what the data looks like. We're going to start with the month on month change

column and the easiest way to compute descriptive statistics quickly in Excel is to use its data

analysis tool located in the data tab on the ribbon. So I'm just going to go up to data

on the ribbon here and then go across to data analysis on the right hand side.

Now for some of you this button might not appear there automatically.

So you have to kind of install this analysis tool pack yourself.

I'll show you very quickly how to do that now. You just go to File, Options, Add-ins, and then where it says

Manage Excel Add-ins down here you click go and you just need to make sure that

you've got these two checkboxes ticked here. Analysis Toolpak and Analysis

Toolpak VBA and press OK. Once you've done that you should see the data analysis button

appear on the right hand side of the ribbon within the data tab and you can

then use that to calculate descriptive statistics as follows. So if we click on

that button you'll see a dialog box that appears, a data analysis dialog box,

which gives us a number of different options. We're going to choose the descriptive statistics analysis tool and press OK.

What we're then going to do is choose the range of data that we want to calculate descriptive statistics for.

Now remember I said this is going to be for our month-on- month change data so what I'm going to do here is basically select cell C2 within this

input range box and then press ctrl shift and down on the keyboard to select all of the data

in that column so I actually had to press ctrl shift and down twice there

to get to the end of the data and you can see that it's now put in the input range of C2 to C746.

That's all the data that we need. We want to then click and select our output range.

Our output range is just going to be a cell that we select in this sheet. I'm going to scroll back

to the top of the sheet and I'm going to select cell G2 here as our output range. So our descriptive statistics

table is going to output into cell G2. Before we press OK I just want to make

sure that we check the summary statistics box down here otherwise we're

not going to get any statistics actually returned to us in cell G2. So we want to

make sure summary statistics is

checked and then we can press OK. Okay let's move this chart over again to the

right-hand side. So you can see here what we've got is some descriptive

statistics data. I'm going to go through what all of these mean in a moment but I

just want to tidy things up slightly first. This cell down

here H17 that has a zero in it is unnecessary so I'm just going to delete

or clear the contents of that cell by pressing delete on the keyboard and we

can rename this table to descriptive statistics. So I'm just selecting cell G2

currently you can see in the formula bar at the top that the name in that cell, the text

in that cell is column 1 and we can see that appearing here.

So I'm just going to write over that with descriptive statistics, press enter.

And lastly, before I move on to explaining what all these statistics are, we're just going

to tidy up some of the formatting of these numbers. So I'm going to select the values that we have for the mean, standard error,

median, mode, standard deviation, sample variance and I'm going to right-click

within that selection and go to format cells and then format them to

percentages with two decimal places and press ok.

In fact what I might do is just seeing that it may need some extra decimal places there to see all the numbers so I'm going to go back into that right clicking that selection format cells

percentage will change this to three decimal places. I'm going to do the same thing for range

minimum and maximum they need to be percentages as well.

So we'll just make them percentages to three decimal places.

So it's consistent.

And then our other numbers with decimal places here.

So kurtosis, skewness and sum.

I'll just select those in turn and format them as numbers to three decimal places.

Rather than all these additional decimal places that we don't really need.

Okay so we've got our summary statistics calculated now and tidied up.

so we've reformatted them a little bit so we can see the values more clearly.

Let me describe what some of these statistics actually mean now and I'm going to start with

what we call the measures of centrality and all of these measures that I'm going to talk about now

basically try to describe where the center of the data set that we're looking at lies.

So basically the values are the mean, the mode and the median. The mean is what you guys will

typically know as the average. It's the equally weighted average of all the data points in the

series. The median is the middle number if you were to order the data points from smallest to largest

and the mode is the most commonly occurring value in the data series. So as I said all of these

statistics are calculated to give you an idea of where the center of the the data series. So as I said all of these statistics are calculated

to give you an idea of where the centre of the data set lies. We've then got some measures

of dispersion in our values for standard deviation and variance here. These values basically

summarise the dispersion of the data points around the mean of the data set. And in a normally distributed set

of data, such as data on human height or weight, you typically expect to see around 68% of the data

lying within one standard deviation from the mean, 95% of the data within two standard deviations

from the mean, and 99% within three standard deviations. Part of what we're going to do in the subsequent analysis

is compare how our data set here compares with those values that we'd expect to see in a normally

distributed data set. Now if at this stage you're not really following what I mean about or what I

mean when I talk about normally distributed data, or you're unclear with any

of the descriptive statistics that I've been talking about, then you'll need to have a

read through of our introduction to statistics PDF in the download section for this video.

And hopefully that gives you a better idea of what I'm trying to say here.

Let's go on to some more values now.

We've got values for kurtosis and skewness. Effectively these values tell us how

normally the data is distributed and Excel measures something called excess kurtosis rather than

kurtosis itself and if the value for excess kurtosis is higher than zero then we know that

the distribution of our data set is peakier around

the mean and has fatter tails than a normally distributed data set. Equally if we look at our

skewness value and that's somewhere different to the value of zero then we know that it's not

normally distributed as well. So a skewness value of over zero is a positive skew

and that means that a higher proportion of the data lies in the positive tail than a normal

distribution would predict and if it's negative then a higher proportion of the data lies in the

negative tail than a normal distribution.

distribution would predict. I'm going to refer back to these statistics a little bit when we

look at the empirical distribution of our month on month percentage change data series.

So those are the key statistics that you need to pay attention to but there are some other useful

ones here as well to give you an idea about the sort of range and depth of the data series.

The first we've got is the count down here so that counts the number of data points in the data series.

We've also got values for the minimum, the maximum and the range.

Okay they should be fairly self-explanatory. The minimum is the lowest value in the data series,

the maximum is the highest value and the range is the difference between those two values.

between those two values. Okay so that's our descriptive statistics done for the month-on-month percentage change data for M2 money supply. Let's have a look at the year-on-year percentage change

data now in column D. We're going to go through the same process in calculating our descriptive

statistics table for that data. So I'm just going to go to data analysis on the ribbon in the data

tab and click on that. Choose descriptive statistics as our analysis tool again and press OK.

We're going to change the input range this time for the data that we're looking at and want to

calculate the summary statistics for. So the input range now is going to go from cell D2

input range now is going to go from cell D2. I'm going to press ctrl shift down twice to get to the bottom of this data set to D746. I'm then going to change the output range. It's not going to be G2

because we don't want it to overwrite this data that we have for our monthly or month-on-month

percentage change data. I'm actually going to put it well out the way into cell N2 over here and

that's because we're going to have a lot more analysis to do for our month on month

data in these columns over here. And then we've already got the summary

statistics checkbox ticked so that's okay. We can just press okay there and it's

going to put all of our descriptive statistics for our year-on-year percentage change data into cell N2.

To tidy this up, we just do the same as what we've done previously.

I'm going to delete the zero at the bottom of the table.

I'm going to change all the numbers that we need to percentages to three decimal places in exactly the same way as we did previously.

And also for our values that we're keeping as decimals but to less decimal places than

they already show.

Okay, a couple of things to notice very quickly about this data.

You can see that the measures

for centrality, so I'm

talking about the mean and the median here

really, are considerably higher

for the

year-on-year percentage change data than for our month-on-month changes, as is the dispersion of

the data seen in the range, the variance and the standard deviation as well. That all makes sense

because we're measuring percentage changes over a longer period of time. So we'd expect those

changes to be larger on aggregate. What's also quite interesting is that on a relative basis, the year on year data looks to

be closer to normally distributed than the month on month data, which we can see in lower values for

ketosis and skewness as well. A couple of other things I quickly want to point out here as well

is that we've got an error value for the mode. That's basically because no value was repeated

more than once. So there isn't a value for the most that's basically because no value was repeated more than once so

there isn't a value for the most commonly occurring number in this data set for year on year change

and also the count is lower okay 733 versus 744 that's because we can't calculate year on year

percentage change for as many data points as we can month-on-month percentage change for obvious reasons.

So that's why there's a low account there.

Now at this stage I just want to point out that for the rest of the video I'm just going to be going through the analysis processes for our month-on-month percentage change data for M2 money supply

rather than year-on-year percentage change data for M2 money supply rather than year on year

percentage change data. And that is just because the year on year analysis is going to be identical

in methodology. And I'm going to include that in the template file for you guys as well,

which you can download and I'll also show you later in the video. So basically the process

for analyzing both the year on year percentage

change data and month on month percentage change data is exactly the same. So I don't think it's

worth going over it twice because for one it doesn't cover any new material. Secondly,

it's going to take quite a lot of extra time if we did. thirdly you guys are going to have access to all of that analysis anyway in the template download. So what we're going to do next is try to build a better picture

about how our month-on-month data is distributed and answer some questions such as you know what

the proportion is of data that lies within certain ranges. So for example, what proportion of month

on month percentage change data has a value between 1% and minus 1%. To do that, what I'm going to do

is create what's called a histogram table and chart. That's going to look at the monthly rates

of change in M2 money supply. And that'll help us understand what normal and abnormal rates of change in M2 money supply. And that'll help us understand

what normal and abnormal rates of change are

given the entire historical data set that we're looking at.

Now to generate histogram data,

we're gonna need to count the number of data points

that lie within certain ranges, as I said.

And to do this, we're going to have to create intervals to count the data points in between.

So for example, for our monthly data, I'm going to set intervals that start from minus 0.8%

and increase in increments of 0.15% all the way up to 1.9%.

Then we'll calculate the number of M2 month-on-month percentage change data points that lie within or between each of

those intervals. And that data can then be plotted in a chart and also sort of counted in a table.

And we can look at its empirical distribution. Now, if you guys are wondering how I came up with

those interval values that I just mentioned before, it's basically just because I've already

looked at the distribution. So I know what's reasonable for this data series. If you guys are carrying out distribution analysis for other sets

of data yourselves then I suggest when you're creating intervals you take into consideration

the mean of the data set, the standard deviation and the range of the data which is why we've gone

over or part of the reason why we've gone over those descriptive statistics first and that should give you a good idea of the intervals

that you should set to make sure that you visually can capture all of the data properly.

Okay so I'm going to start entering the intervals that we want for this month-on-month

data now starting in cell C18. So if you remember the

first interval that I said that we're going to use or the lowest interval is going to be minus 0.8%.

Okay, that is as a decimal minus 0.008. So I'm putting that in cell G18. And then the next interval, if you remember, I said we're going to increase the intervals in increments of 0.15%.

So the next interval would be minus 0.0065 as a decimal.

And that's an increase of 0.15% as an increment.

Now, you'll remember before we've talked about copying formulas down and across in Excel but what you can also do is copy down and across patterns.

Okay what I mean by patterns is we can put in values like we've just done in here in a couple of cells or in more than two cells and you can then copy whatever pattern Excel recognizes in those values down or across. So if I

select those two cells and then click and drag the little green box in the

bottom right of the selection downwards that's going to start copying

down whatever pattern Excel recognises with these two values and basically in

this case it's going to recognise the pattern which is a difference between the

two values. So it's recognising the incremental increase of 0.15%.

So I can just drag that down until we get to plus 1.9% or in decimal 0.019.

You can see that next to my cursor at the moment.

and that will be in cell B36.

So that's a really easy way to copy down

constant incremental changes in decimal values.

Okay, so let's head that column with intervals in cell G17.

And now what we can do is use Excel's data analysis tool

as we did before, but this time to count the number

of data points that lie between all of these intervals that we've just created.

So what I'm going to do is within the data tab on the ribbon go to data analysis

again. This time I'm going to go to histogram and press OK and our input

range for the histogram is going to be all our original data set.

So our month on month percentage change data set.

So I'm just going to select from cell C2, control shift down to make sure I go to the bottom of the data.

So C2 to C746 in the input range.

The output range I'm going to select by clicking inside this box here.

Scroll back to the top of the sheet.

The output range I'm going to make H17.

And we also need to remember to set our bin range.

Now our bin range is basically our range of intervals that we're going to use.

So if we select this bin range box here and then inside that box,

we basically click and drag over the

cell references for our intervals so that would be g18 to g36 we're then ready to go we can press

okay and when you do that you'll see that it's created a table with all of our bins which is our

intervals okay they're called bins because it's almost like a bucket.

So ranges it's, it's referring to. These are our bin values. They're the same as our intervals

basically, because they create bins within which data points fall within. Okay. Now the frequency

is the number of data points that fall within these bins. Okay. within these ranges defined by our intervals now I'm going to explain

all this a bit more in a moment but before we go on to that let's just quickly format these decimals

for our intervals and bins at two percentages to two or three decimal places just because

it's much easier to read them as percentages than decimals when we're dealing with values like this

so I've selected all of

the intervals and bin values that we have here. I'm going to right click within the selection,

go to format cells, and then just format them as percentages to three decimal places. Okay,

so that's just a little bit easier to read there. You can now see what I meant when I was saying

we're starting at minus 0.8%. We're going up in intervals of 0.15% until we get

to a maximum of 1.9% okay and all of those intervals then define these ranges.

So if we take a look at the frequency column here let's

at the top what this is basically telling us is that there's no data points in our month-on-month

percentage change data set that have a value of less than -0.8%. If we follow on from that

we can also see that there's no observations that lie between 0.8% or -0.8% and minus 0.65%.

Continuing with that logic you can see the amount of data points that lie within the ranges defined by the intervals.

So if we go on to the next one there's one data point that is in between the value of minus 0.65% and minus 0.5% and so on.

Okay.

And then roughly somewhere in the middle of the data set, for example, there's 146 data

points that lie between plus 0.4% and plus 0.55%.

So basically 146 times out of all of the historical months that we have for our M2 money supply, the month-on-month

percentage change has been between 0.4% and 0.55%. Okay, that's what that's saying. At the beginning,

the first range defined by these intervals is less than the lowest value that we see and the last range that we have down

here so where there's nine data points refers to more than or greater than the highest interval

that we have set of 1.9%. So you can see already here how this gives us an idea of how month

to month percentage changes in M2 money supply are distributed. And there's lots of

data points that we can see around the mean and the median, okay, around 0.55%, 0.7%, that sort of

range, and much less in the extremes or the tails of the distribution, i.e. down in the sort of minus 0.5% range and also the kind of plus 1.5% range and higher.

We can also see how that relates to our descriptive statistics. For example, we calculated a positive

skew before of 4.826 and remember I said that that skew, a positive skew means that there's a higher

percentage of extreme moves on the positive side

than there are on the negative side and we can see that in this data here it's skewed the extreme

values are skewed in the positive side as opposed to the negative side. Okay so before we go any

further I just want to make these ranges a little clearer.

So in the next column, column J, what I'm going to do is write out these ranges in text

format so it's easier to understand and make reference to.

And this is going to come in useful for our chart later on as well. So basically instead

of having to try and interpret what the range is that these various intervals refer to we're going

to write it out in a very clear text format instead in column j so in cell j17 I'm going to title this

column with range and then in the cell below that j18 I'm going to start typing in the range that

this interval refers to and I'm going to write that in text format.

And the way or one way we can write this in text format in Excel is by using a

formula with quotation marks.

So I can put in, for example, equals.

That's how we start all of our formulas in Excel, then open quotation marks and

type in less than minus 0.8% and close quotation marks and press enter and you'll see that then

that writes out in text format the range that obviously refers to the adjacent interval or bin

value. Okay so equally for the next one what I can do is type that in as well with an equation

and quotation marks but

before I do that let me show you what would happen if you just tried to type

this in as numbers straight into the cell without a formula and quotation

marks in this instance okay so the range that this refers to is minus 0.8% to minus 0.65%. Okay, if I try and enter that in now in this cell, Excel is going to confront me

with an error. And the reason for that is it's confused because basically we started off what

we've entered into the cell with a mathematical operator. So it thinks that it's going to be

some sort of calculation and it's not necessarily text.

That wouldn't have actually been an issue with the first one because we started it off with text

so it formats the whole thing as text but with this one and the rest of the ranges that we type out

this is a problem. That's why I'm saying a good way to get around this is use an equal sign and put

everything in quotation marks that way Excel knows that we're trying to write this out as text instead of using numbers or

calculations or anything like that.

Okay, so you guys get the idea.

I'm just going to go ahead now and write out all of these ranges in that same format so

that we've got a good list of text ranges that's really easy for us to refer to.

Okay, so that's our text ranges done. What I want to do next is draw your attention back to our frequency column, so column I, this data that we have here. And I want to point out that while

it's interesting and useful to understand the absolute number of observations in each bin range,

it isn't actually as valuable as knowing the percentage frequency of those observations. And

what I mean by that is the number of observations within each range as a percentage of the total

number of data points in the series that we're looking at. The series in this case obviously

being the month-on- month percentage change of M2

money supply that we see in column C here. So let's improve our understanding by calculating

these frequencies as percentages now and I'm going to do that in column K and start in cell K18

with a formula which is equals and I'm going to make a reference to I18 and then divide by a reference of H16.

Now what this formula is doing is basically taking the absolute count or number of observations

for our first bin range, so less than minus 0.8% and dividing that by the total count of all the

observations we see in the data series. Okay, now obviously in this case we're dividing 0 by the total count of all the observations we see in the data series.

Okay now obviously in this case we're dividing 0 by 744 that's going to equate to a percentage of 0%

but what we want to do is basically create a formula that we can use when we copy down to

quickly calculate these percentages for all of the bin ranges that we have.

Now you've seen already how we can drag down formulas when we calculated percentage change

values for column C and D. And the reason why we could drag those formulas down is because

we took advantage of Excel's dynamic cell referencing, okay,

or relative cell referencing, meaning the formulas changed their referencing to cells based on what

formulas, what cells the formulas were input to, okay. Now, in this case, if we keep this total

formula as completely dynamic, then as we copy this formula down,

let me just go ahead and do this now. So I'm entering the formula into that first cell there,

you can see we've got a value of zero which is what we'd expect. As I copy these formulas down

you'll see that these values don't make any sense. The reason that they don't is, for example, if we look at this second one here that has a value error, it now references the absolute frequency for our second bin range, which is correct,

i19, but it divides it by the value that we see in h17, which doesn't make any sense. That's the

title of our bin column. We want it to keep on referencing H16 no matter what cell we copy these formulas down to.

So what we need to do is change our cell reference for H16 to a fixed cell reference

rather than a relative cell reference. Okay.

So I'm going to delete the contents of those cells I've just copied down there, go back into our top

formula, I18 divided by H16. And with the cursor next to our cell reference for H16, I'm going to

press F4 on the keyboard and that's going to cycle through different ways to fix that reference.

And it uses dollar signs to indicate how that cell reference is fixed.

Okay, when we're looking at cell references in Excel you guys obviously know it references the column followed by the row number.

So column letter followed by row number. Whatever you put a dollar sign before in a cell reference fixes that column or row. So if I have a dollar

sign just before the H it will fix the column. If I have a dollar sign before the H and the 16,

the column letter and the row number, it will fix the entire reference both the column and the row.

And also obviously we can fix the reference just the row as well. So in this case what I'm going to do is cycle through

these various fixed reference options that we have until I get a dollar sign before the H and before

the 16 meaning that cell reference is completely fixed or locked as we copy this formula down or

across. Okay so I'm going to press enter now and then copy this formula down.

And now we have all the correct formulas that we need to calculate the percentage of observations

that we see within each range that we're looking at.

We can check that now just by selecting, for example, this last cell here and checking

how the formula is working.

We can still see that it's referencing the correct

value, the correct cell for the absolute number of observations in the bin range that we're

looking at, the associated or adjacent bin range. And we can see that it's dividing that

value still by our fixed reference for the count in the entire data series. So that's

fine. We know that's working. Let's now select all of those cells

and format them by right clicking within that selection formatting the cells as a percentage

to three decimal places and what we'll then see is very clearly the percentage of observations that we

have that lie within each range that we've created.

Now another way of describing the percentage frequency calculations that we've just made

is by referring to them as probability values, since they do actually represent the empirical

probability of data points lying within these various ranges that we've created.

So what I'm going to do is head this column that we've just created with the word probability.

And what that basically allows us to say is if we just pick out a value here,

for example down here, if we're looking within the range of 1.15

percent to 1.3 percent remember that is a reference to the range of m2 month on month money supply

growth that we would see we can say that there is a 2.15 chance or probability that our m2 month on

month percentage growth will be between those two values and you can obviously apply that logic to

any of the values that you see in this

probability column. Now remember obviously this is on an empirical basis meaning it's on the basis

of looking at the historical data that we have. But that is a reasonable way to assess these values.

Okay so we're almost finished with this histogram table but there is one more column

that I want to calculate to give us even more of an understanding about the distribution and

empirical probabilities of various values in the data set. I'm going to head this next column here

cu.probability and basically in this column we're going to calculate the cumulative probabilities

for this data set and what I mean by that is we're going to calculate the cumulative probabilities for this data set.

And what I mean by that is we're going to calculate or add up sequentially all the probability values that we see in column K.

Starting from the lowest range and then ending with the highest range until we basically account for 100% of the data.

So let me start putting in these formulas now so you see what I mean.

of the data. So let me start putting in these formulas now so you see what I mean. So in cell L18 here I'm just going to make this cell equal to the value that we see in K18,

okay, our probability for the lowest range less than minus 0.8%. What I'm then going to

do in the cell below that in L19 I'm going to add the cumulative probability that we have calculated in the cell above L18 plus

the probability of the new range so minus 0.8 percent to minus 0.65 percent and the probability

for that range basically and then I'm going to copy that formula down and you'll see that it then

basically adds in a cumulative

fashion all of the probabilities assigned to the various ranges that we've created until we account

for 100% of the data. So why is this useful to us? Basically it gives us a really quick and easy way

to say that there's an x% empirical probability that data is less than a certain value. So for example,

we could say here that there's a 7.392% chance that on any given month, M2 growth will be less than

0.1%. And equally, we can apply the same logic in the inverse. So for example we could say that there's roughly a 5% chance that M2 growth will be greater

than 1.15% since we know that there's roughly a 95% chance.

chance that it will be less than 1.15%. Okay, so already at this stage we're starting to build a

really good picture about what we should expect from M2 growth on a month-on-month basis and what

might be considered normal and what might be considered abnormal. Okay, so that's our histogram

table completed. What I want to show you now is how you can visually assess this data in the form of a histogram chart. So to do

that I'm just going to select down here cell G39 then I'm going to go to

insert on the ribbon and select a 2D column chart. You'll see that then that

presents me with an empty chart area that I can move around. I'm going to move that down below our histogram

table and make it a little bit bigger. I'm then going to right click within the chart area and

go to select data so we can add some data to this chart. I'm then going to press the

add series button on the left hand side in this new dialog box and give the series name or reference the series name by selecting

cell k17 okay which is just called probability and the series values that we're going to select

are all the values from k18 to k37 so all of our probability values for the various ranges

that we have so just make sure you

overwrite whatever was in here before, if anything, and just click and drag to select all the appropriate

values. So it should look something like this. Okay, then we can press OK. We've now got some

data in the chart you can see behind this dialogue box. That is our probability series. But we also want to make sure that we add

some axis labels and this is where the text ranges come in handy that I created earlier. So I'm going

to click edit for this horizontal axis label category. We're then going to reference in this

box here all of our text ranges just by left clicking and dragging over

all of those cells. So that is J18 to J37. I'll then press OK and press OK again. We can take a look

at our chart and we can see now that we've got a decent looking column chart showing the probability

or frequency percentage of data of occurrences that land within these various

ranges for M2 growth. Now I've already been through how you can change the aesthetics of charts so I'm

not going to make any big changes here. The only thing I want to do is make sure we change the

chart title and reduce its size and also give this y-axis a title as well. So the chart title

I'm just going to make equal to m2 month on month percentage histogram. Okay I'm just

doing that by selecting the title and then typing over it. I'm then going to reduce the text size

as I showed earlier by selecting the chart title. I'll go to home on the ribbon and just reduce the

font size up here. And then to add a y-axis title what we can do is click on the chart, go to design

at the top on the ribbon, then choose add chart element on the left hand side.

Go to axis titles and choose a primary vertical axis title. You can see that adds an axis title on the left there. We can just select the text that's in that box, delete it and then type over

it with something new. So I'm just going to type over it with probability. Okay, because these values, this axis

represents the probability of these various ranges occurring basically. Okay, and actually I think we

can, I'll select that y-axis title, go to home again and just make the font slightly bigger.

again and just make the font slightly bigger. Okay so at this stage we can now visually assess the distribution of monthly M2 percentage growth and that just makes it easier to understand really

what all these numbers are actually referring to. So you can see that the curve of the data that we

have is roughly bell-shaped which makes us think that the data is normally distributed. But as I've already

hinted at with the values of kurtosis and skew that we've seen in our descriptive statistics,

it's actually quite different. The data is peakier around the mean, okay, so around these values here,

and the tails or extremes in the data are fatter as well. So basically the values that we see in these extreme

ranges in the low and the high end have more occurrences than we'd expect in a normal distribution.

Okay what I'm going to do now is take this a step further and show you how to calculate the

differences between this distribution and a normal distribution by doing some standard deviation

analysis. But before we

go on to that, let's just tidy up what we have already in terms of our analysis tables that

we've created and add some definition to these tables. And what I mean by that basically is doing

some basic formatting changes in terms of adding borders and maybe coloring some of the cells as

well. Okay. Now, Now obviously this stage when you go

through this yourselves you can kind of change the aesthetics of the sheet however you want a bit like

I said with charts as well. So this is just to give you an idea of the kind of steps that you can take

to help add some definition to the various aspects that you have in your spreadsheet. So what I'm

going to start by doing is selecting all of the analysis that we've done up in this section here,

all the cells, and basically removing the borders that are already there because you can see some lines,

some borders that have basically been pulled through when we've done our data analysis.

So I'm going to...

basically select all of those cells, go to home on the ribbon and then look at the border menu

on the left hand side and just make sure that I choose no border within that border drop down

and you'll see when I do that it gets rid of all those borders that we had previously.

Now we're going to add back some borders but in a more structured way. So I'm going to select just the histogram table here and with that selected I'm going to go back to our border menu and add all borders. Okay so that adds

all borders basically to every cell that I just selected and with that selection still in place

I'm then going to add some thick outside borders. Okay, so I'm going to the same

place in the drop down border menu, this time choosing thick outside borders instead of all

borders. And you'll see what that does. Basically, it just adds some definition to that entire table

so we can sort of see things a little bit more clearly there. Next, what I'm going to do is add

a thick outside border to

our descriptive statistics as well to kind of define that section from the histogram table.

So I've just selected the descriptive statistics cells and then clicked on thick outside border there

and you can see we've got the same thing occurring. You'll notice that by default in Excel grid lines are basically shown

to define all the different cells. So those are those faint sort of gray lines you see running

across rows and column intersections and we can obviously see those in our descriptive statistics

as well. Now instead of adding some inside borders or all borders, as I did with these cells in the

histogram table, I'm not going to, I'm basically going to get rid of inside borders here and just

leave this thick outside border. But I don't want these grid lines to show up either. So I'm

selecting all the cells in the descriptive statistics table. And what I'm going to do to

get rid of those is just color the cells or fill the color of the cells

with white okay so I'm choosing white from the fill color drop down menu up here in the home tab

and you'll see when I do that it just colors all the cells white and so it gets rid of those faint

grid lines that we saw there okay we're almost done I, in tidying this up, but it probably makes sense to make our titles bold.

So let's go back to the histogram table now.

I'll select all the titles that we have in that table and just press Ctrl B on the keyboard to make them bold.

Remember, you can also do that by going to the bold button up here in the Home tab on the ribbon.

I'm going to do the same with our descriptive statistics title in cell G2.

And I'll do the same again for all of the titles that we have for our individual descriptive statistics.

Okay, so all of these cells here, I'm just going to select them and make them bold as well.

Okay so it's looking looking pretty good now. It's just one more thing I think that I'll do before I go on to creating this standard deviation table or analysis that I was talking about and that is selecting cell G1 to L1 up here and what I'm going to do is create a title for this whole analysis section that we're creating okay to do that selecting these cells I'm going to merge them so in the home tab on the ribbon

I'm going to click Merge in center that's going to merge all of those cells

into one then I'm going to type M2 money supply month on month percentage

change okay and I'll make that bold as well and we can give this a thick outside

border okay so that title is basically applying to all of the analysis that we're

doing below in this section here. And we've got a little bit of space here, that's deliberate

because we're going to move on to a couple more smaller analysis tables, the first of

which I mentioned just previously is going to be looking at these standard deviation

bounds. So more specifically, what we're going to do is create a table that identifies

the upper and lower bounds for 1, 2 and 3 standard deviations from the mean. And remember

if you're unsure about what a standard deviation is at this stage you can refer back to the

intro to statistics PDF that I mentioned earlier. Once we have those bounds we can then count

the number of observations that lie within those bounds and compare them to what a normal distribution would predict.

So what I'm going to do is basically create the row and column headings first for this analysis table, and then we'll fill in the calculations afterwards.

So in cell I2 here I'm just going to title this new analysis table and the title I'm going to put in is STD space DEV space bounds, okay, and three standing for one, two, and three standard deviations. And then in the cell

below I2, so I3 and down from that, I'm going to type upper bound, lower bound, actual count.

So don't worry too much about what these mean just now, actual percentage count and normal percentage count. Okay so the first thing I'm going to do

here is basically create our bound values for one standard deviation from the mean. I'm going

to start with the upper bound first. So in cell J3 we're going to

enter a formula to calculate this upper bound. I'm going to put in equals then make a reference to our

mean in our descriptive statistics that's cell H4. I'm going to add to that in brackets one times the

standard deviation value that we have in our descriptive statistics. Now we can just type

one asterix and then make a reference to our standard deviation cell. Or what we could do is instead of putting one,

we could just make a reference to our standard deviation bound cell up here.

So cell J2, which is obviously equal to one.

Okay, so you can see from this formula,

basically we're creating an upper bound for one standard deviation from the mean

because we're taking the mean,

we're adding one times the standard deviation from the mean because we're taking the mean we're adding

one times the standard deviation that we have for our data. Now I could just enter that formula there

but what I want to do is make this a little bit more robust by making sure we can copy this across

and down. So I'm going to fix the cell references for the mean and standard deviation.

So that's H4 and H8.

To do that, I'm just clicking inside those cell references within the formula

and pressing F4 on the keyboard, and that's adding those dollar signs

before the column letter and row numbers for each of those references.

And also we want to fix the row, but not the column

for the reference to one, 2 and 3 standard deviation

bounds okay so the J2 reference here so I'm going to press F4 when my cursor is within that J2

reference that's going to fix the whole thing we don't want that so I'm going to press it again

and then you'll see that it's just got the dollar sign before the row number and not the column

letter so it's just fixing the row not the column that's what we want after that I's just got the dollar sign before the row number and not the column letter. So it's just fixing the row, not the column.

That's what we want.

After that, I'm just going to press enter and you'll see there that I've got an upper

bound value for one standard deviation from the mean.

I'm going to copy this formula down to the lower bound row and you'll see that actually

at this stage we've just got exactly the same value.

That's incorrect at the moment because we need to make a minor adjustment to our formula

for the lower bound calculations.

So I'm going to double click inside the lower bound calculation here and instead of it being

an addition sign I'm going to change that to a subtraction sign in the formula.

So basically we're taking the mean and we're minusing one times the standard

deviation to create a lower bound for one standard deviation from the mean and you can see now

we've got an upper bound of about one percent a lower bound for about 0.1 percent in terms of one

standard deviation from the mean. Once we've got those formulas done we can just select those two

cells and copy these formulas across to two and three standard

deviations from the mean by left-clicking and dragging on the little green box at the bottom right of the selection

across to column L. And you'll see now that we've got values for the upper and lower bounds for two and three

standard deviations from the mean as well as one standard deviation from the mean.

And you can go in and check that these formulas are working correctly.

For example, we can see here in the upper bound for two standard deviations from the mean,

it's still referencing our fixed reference for the mean and standard deviation,

but it's moved our reference for the number of standard deviations from the mean

from cell J2 to K2, and that's correct.

The same logic would apply for the rest of these cells as well. So now we know our upper and lower bounds for 1, 2 and 3 standard deviations from

the mean let's count the number of observations that we see in our M2 month-on-month data that

have values between these upper and lower bounds that we've created. So I'm going to start in cell J5

here and type in a new formula. So I'm going to put equals and it's going to start off with a function.

The function is going to be countifs, so I'm typing in countifs here then open brackets and I'm just

going to go ahead and basically write this whole formula out and then come back and explain it

afterwards. Okay so I've written in

countifs open brackets. I'm then going to make a reference to column C which is our month on month

m2 data. I'm going to fix that reference put in a comma to move on to the next parameter of this

function. I'm then going to put in our first criteria which is it's going to be greater than

or equal to our lower bound for one standard deviation from the mean. So in quotation marks I'm going to put greater than or equal to operators,

close the quotation marks and link that with an ampersand to a cell reference which is going to be

J4 representing our lower bound. Then I'm going to put in another comma, choose column C again

and fix that reference, then another comma and choose another criteria this

time it's going to be in quotation marks less than and join that with an ampersand to another cell

reference cell at J3 and close brackets. Whenever you have a function in Excel it's always going to

have a bunch of parameters that you need to fill in within brackets after you write in the function.

Okay.

Now, this function is called countifs.

It counts the number of data points in an array that you select.

So the array in this example is column C.

Okay.

Our M2 month on month percentage change data.

And it counts the number of data points in there subject

to certain criteria that you define okay and how it works is in the first section you basically

reference the array that you want to count so column c in this case after the comma you then define the first criteria that you want to count column C subject

to and this is just an Excel quirk really, a way of writing greater than or equal to whatever

is in cell J4. Okay, the fact don't worry too much that you have to put the graph

greater than or equal to operators within quotation marks,

and then link that with an ampersand to J4.

It's just a quirk of Excel and you guys will get used to it

when you use functions like this.

Then we move on to a second criteria,

because again, remember, we don't want to count

all the data in column C

that fulfills just higher than the lower bound.

We need it to be higher than the lower bound but lower than the

upper bound. Okay so we've then got to define the criteria range that we're looking at again. So

that's column c and then the criteria, a second criteria that we're going to use which is less

than cell j3. So the upper bound. So that's how that works. Don't worry too much if that seems overly

complex at the moment. I think once you guys start using formulas and functions like this you're

going to get really used to it and just understand the little quirks of Excel and the kind of logic

that it uses. Okay so I'm just going to enter that in now and you'll see what happens. Okay so we

have a count of 620. That means we have 620 data points,

month-on-month percentage change data points for our M2 money supply, out of 744 that fall between

these bounds. So one standard deviation from the mean. Let's copy this formula across to two and

three standard deviations from the mean and see what happens. Okay so we've now got some values some actual counts for the number

of data points that lie between the upper and lower bound for two standard

deviations from the mean and three standard deviations from mean. I'm just

going to double click in these formulas to check that they're working. Okay so our

column reference they've stayed fixed that, so our column reference, they've

stayed fixed. That's great. And our reference to the criteria have moved because we didn't

fix those references. So that's great as well. They're still referring or they're referring to

the appropriate upper and lower bounds that we want. Okay, so that all looks good. We can say

that there's 729 data points that lie within two standard deviations

from the mean and 736 data points that lie within three standard deviations from the mean.

Now as I kind of covered before when you're doing analysis like this it's useful to see how much of

the total data these observations, these counts actually represent, you know, as a percentage of the total count.

So that's what we're going to do in this next row here, actual percentage count. And in cell J6,

I'm going to type in a formula to calculate this. So equals the actual count reference, so J5,

the cell above it, divided by the total count, which is cell H16. Now, when we copy this formula across, obviously we want the total count reference to stay fixed.

This other one can move as we copy it across.

So I'm just going to make sure that the reference to H16 is fixed and I can press enter and copy.

these values across and because these are percentages we should format them to display

themselves as a percentage. So with all of these cells selected I'm going to right click within the

selection go to format cells and format them as percentages to three decimal places. Okay and we

can see that you know for example the 83% of the data in column C lies between our upper and lower bound for one standard deviation

from the mean and so on. Now remember the point of this table was to observe how these percentages

may differ from what a normal distribution would predict in terms of the percentage count that a normal distribution

has for one, two, and three standard deviations from the mean. Now you guys will know from the

intro to statistics PDF that I've mentioned a number of times that for one standard deviation

from the mean, a normal distribution accounts for 68.2% of all the observations. For two standard deviations from the mean it's 95.4% of all

observations and for three standard deviations from the mean it accounts for 99.7% of all observations.

So what does this tell us? Well if we look at one standard deviation from the mean we can see that our data is peakier around the mean

within one standard deviation because our data actually accounts for 83% within one standard

deviation from the mean rather than what a normal distribution would predict which is 68% of the

data. So that tells us it's peakier around the mean than a normal distribution. And that is backed up by our positive kurtosis value

that we saw earlier as well.

However, as we go out to two and three standard deviations

from the mean, what you'll see,

or three standard deviations particularly,

what you'll see is that actually our empirical data,

our data that we're looking at,

doesn't account for as much of the distribution

as a normal distribution would predict. So our data within three standard deviations from the mean

accounts for 98.9% of the data, whereas in a normal distribution three standard deviations

from the mean accounts for 99.7% of the data. That basically means that there's more data

lying outside this three standard deviation bound on both the lower and the upper side than a normal

distribution would predict. Okay, and that's what we said about fatter tails. Okay, these tails of the

distribution are larger than what we would observe in a normal distribution. And again,

that is backed up by one of the first calculations that we did in our descriptive statistics,

which is the kurtosis value that is greater than zero, or excess kurtosis value that's

greater than zero. Okay, to finish this off, this table,

let's just format it and make it look a bit nicer. I'm going to color all of these cells

as white, fill the color, and then add a thick outside border. So I'm selecting all of those

cells. I'm going to add a thick outside border there and just make all of our row and column

titles bold in this instance. And I think I'll underline as well our standard deviation bound cell here so the

title for the entire table cell I2 by selecting that cell and pressing ctrl u and that underlines

the text in that cell you can also click on the underline button up here in the home tab if you

wish. Okay so we've got space here now for our final analysis table in this sheet and what

we're going to do here is group all of the M2 monthly percentage growth numbers into positive

numbers, negative numbers and zero values.

And as before what I'm going to do when going through this analysis section is start off

by creating all of the column and row titles and then we're going to start filling in the

calculations themselves. all of the column and row titles and then we're going to start filling in the calculations

themselves. So I'm going to start in cell J8 here with column titles and I'm just going

to put in positive data as a title in that column and negative data in K8 and 0 in L8.

Then I'm going to enter row titles starting in cell I9.

I'm just going to put in mean count frequency percentage and then frequency adjusted mean.

Okay, so what I'm going to do now is calculate the average of all the positive data points in our month on month data set.

So that's column C.

all the positive data points in our month on month data set so that's column C and to do this we're going to use a function called average if which operates in a very similar way actually to the

count ifs function that we used earlier so in cell j9 I'm going to type equals average if then open

brackets and we can see the parameters that we need to fill in here so we've got a range to define

and some criteria to define as well let's start with the range that's just going to be column c all of our

m2 month or month percentage change data i'm going to fix that reference put in a comma in the

function and move on to the next parameter which is our criteria and i'm just going to put in

quotation marks here greater than zero and close brackets so that basically is just going to put in quotation marks here greater than zero and close brackets. So that basically is just

going to average all of the data points in column C that fulfill this criteria of being greater than

zero. So basically all the positive data points. Okay I can press enter there and we've got a value.

I'm going to come back to formatting that cell in a moment but let's calculate this

for negative data as well. So our average for our negative data points.

I'm going to drag the formula across, step into the formula. We can see that the range is still

the same column C, that's great. But obviously the criteria we no longer want to be greater than zero,

we want it to be less.

than zero. So just by changing the mathematical operator sign there we can calculate the average

of all of our negative data points in column C and then obviously the mean for all of our zero data

points is just going to be zero so I can just write in zero in that cell there. Let's format all of

these as percentages so I'm selecting those cells right clicking in the selection going to format cells choosing the percentage category and I'm going to put these rounding to three decimal

places. Okay so we have our average for our positive and negative data points. Let's see how many of the

data points in column C our monthly month-on-month percentage change data, are actually

positive and how many are negative. Okay so to do that we're going to use pretty

much identical formula as we did before, this time for count. So count if, not

count ifs because we're only going to use one criteria this time. So equals

count if, open brackets, select our range which is column C, fix that reference,

move on to the criteria parameter in the function.

And this time the criteria is just going to be in quotation marks greater than zero as it was with the average if function that we just put in.

And then going to copy that across.

And again, step into this formula that we've got for our negative data and change the

mathematical operator from a greater than sign to a less than sign. So we just count the data points

that are less than zero and then finally I'm going to copy this formula across again for our zero

values and instead of putting anything in quotation marks or using operators,

the criteria that we want to just set is zero or equal to zero. So we can just put a zero

in the criteria parameter for that function and you'll see then that we've got zero data

points that fulfill that criteria. Now as always it's useful to calculate these counts as a percentage

of the total number of data points. So in this frequency percentage row I'm just going to start

in cell J11 type in formula equals the count that we see for positive data points cell J10 divided

by the total count that we have in our descriptive statistics, H16. I'm going to fix the reference to that total count and then enter that formula in and

copy that across to our other columns for our frequency percentage count.

Okay, and then with those cells selected,

I'll format them as percentages to three decimal places.

And we can then see that how many sort of data points we have

that are positive negative or zero in our total data set so the vast majority obviously positive

95 plus negative the rest and there's no data points that

have a value of zero. Now we can calculate the probability or frequency adjusted mean

and this is basically just the the weighted mean for the positive, negative and zero data groups.

And the means are weighted by the probability of occurrence of each group and the sum of all

of these frequency adjusted means will equate to one. So in this cell, J12, I'm just going to type equals the mean for the positive data set, J9, times by the probability of occurrence for positive data points, which is J11.

And that will give me the frequency adjusted mean.

Now at the moment, you can see that it's just returned a load of hashtags.

That's just because it's trying to write a value to a lot more

decimal places than will fit in the cell so if you just right click on the cell format that cell and

limit the decimal places to three then we'll see what value it is okay and we can copy that formula

across now to our negative data points and our zero data points. And you'll see that we have a positive data frequency adjusted mean of 0.57%,

a negative one of minus 0.005%.

And obviously our zero grouping returns a 0% frequency adjusted mean.

Now, if you add all of those up, so if I select all of those cells

and look at the bottom of the Excel sheet down

here, you'll see the sum is 0.567%, which is actually exactly the same as the mean for the

entire data set. Okay. So this is in short, just the probability weighted mean for each data grouping.

Okay. So this table basically just gives us an idea of you know how often we

can expect positive or negative data points for M2 monthly percentage growth and it also

gives us an idea of the average value we might expect for both positive or negative data

points. So let's finish this table off now by tidying it up. I'm going to select all the cells from I8 to L16 here and I'm going to color

all of them as white. Then I'm going to just add a thick outside border here and just make sure all

of our column titles and row titles are bold. Okay so that's that analysis table done. There's one more chart we should probably

plot and that is the monthly moves in M2 money supply itself. So to do this

let's insert a new chart at the bottom of all of our analysis here. So I'm going

to scroll down the sheet a little bit and just go to insert on the ribbon and

insert a 2D column chart. Now reposition this chart area make it a

little bit bigger like our other chart and then within chart. I'm going to reposition this chart area, make it a little bit bigger like

our other chart and then within this area I'm going to right click and go to select data so we can add

a data series to this chart and I'm going to click this add button on the left hand side to add a

series. The series that we're going to add as I

just said is the M2 month on month percentage change series. So column C basically. So the name

that we're going to apply to this series is just the title that we see in cell C1. So I'm just

going to make a reference to cell C1 in that box. And series values that we have are just going to

go down from C2 to the end of the data set. So I'm just pressing ctrl shift+ down twice on the keyboard there to quickly select all of our month-on-month

data. So that's C2 to C746. Press OK and then we need to add our horizontal axis labels. So I'm

going to click Edit here and make sure we choose all the appropriate dates for our month on month data. So I'm going to choose from cell A2 down to the end of the

data set. So A2 to A746 that's all the dates that we need and press okay again. Scroll back to the

top of the sheet and we can see that we've now got our M2 month on month percentage change data

in a column chart format. Now this looks okay as is but there's a

few things that we can do to make the chart a lot clearer to read. So let's start by moving these

dates from the zero value of the y-axis to the bottom of the chart and you'll see what I mean in

a moment. So if I double click the dates here you will see a format axis panel appear on the

right-hand side and you just need to go down to the labels tab and then select

the label position as low rather than next to axis and you'll see then the

dates instead of appearing next to that zero axis now

appear at the bottom of the chart and that just makes things a little bit

easier to read. Now what we're going to do is reduce the gaps between all of

these columns and color them in a different color so I'm going to double

click the columns themselves so the data itself in this chart and again you'll

see this format data series panel appear on the right hand side. I'm going to make the gap width of these

columns 0 so it will bunch all the columns together there won't be any gaps

between them you might not see how that's changed just yet but it has

actually removed gaps between columns and then what we're going to do is go to

the fill and line options in this format data series panel and go to the fill tab and choose a solid fill.

And we're also going to tick the checkbox that says invert if negative.

And what that's going to do is basically cover color, sorry, the negative data points in a different color.

And we can change these colors to whatever we want. You can see at the

moment it looks like we've got blue and black. In actual fact it's blue and white but I think it's got some

borders there. So anyway let's just change the colors to green for our positive values and red for our negative

values there. So that's pretty much it in terms of what you guys need to know in order to build out

this analysis yourselves. As I touched on at the beginning, the point of all of this really is to

be able to identify abnormal prints in M2 money supply growth, particularly on the upside. So we

can identify when the Fed is stepping in to provide liquidity to support the economy

in terms of growth and inflation and also of course markets. By knowing what the distribution of M2

growth data looks like as we've been through here you should now have a good idea of what values are

typical and what values are abnormal whenever new data comes out. So for example, if a new monthly figure

came out that represents a 1.9% increase in monthly M2 money supply, then you know that this only

really happens around 1% of the time. And so that would be abnormal, certainly on a historical basis.

And so that would need to prompt those questions

I posed at the beginning of the video. So things like, you know, asking yourselves, does this line

up with what I'm seeing from money markets and other leading indicators? If not, what does the Fed know

that I don't know? And maybe you need to do some more work to understand what's going on in markets

in the wider economy if you don't know or don't understand why these prints might be occurring.

All else being equal, we should expect significantly positive prints to improve economic and market conditions going forward because the Fed is providing liquidity there.

But that being said, you know, the phrase all else being equal, that never actually realistically applies

in a practical sense. So you always need to keep your eyes open to other factors that we cover in

the rest of the video series as well, of course. There is one more bit of Excel analysis that I

want to go through with you guys, which might help you identify these irregular prints. And it's also

going to give us a chance to look back historically

at what was happening in markets when there have been these big m2 prints over the previous years.

So what we're going to do is basically match up these m2 numbers or m2 growth numbers with

S&P 500 prices and we're going to calculate some percentiles and then filter the data to show us when these big

percentage moves happened in the past and briefly go through what might have been causing them in

markets at those times or at least what was happening in markets and the economy at those times.

To carry out this next bit of analysis we're going to create a new sheet in this spreadsheet file and

we can do that easily by clicking on the plus sign in the bottom left of the spreadsheet window so that creates a new sheet

and when you click on that you'll see a new sheet is created and you can very easily rename that

sheet just by right clicking on the current sheet name and going to rename so i'm going

just going to name this sheet historical analysis month on month or MOM. So to start with in this

sheet what we want to do is just copy in our monthly M2 data that we had in the previous sheet

into this one except we're going to enter it into row 24 and down and that'll become clearer

as we go through this analysis but basically I want to leave some space at the top of the sheet for a chart and some percentile

analysis which you'll see later.

So if we go back to the M2 distribution sheet, all I'm going to do is copy basically all of

the dates and the observations that we see for M2 money stock.

So columns A and B starting from the title.

So cell A1 and B1, Ctrl-Shift and down

to select all of the data in those two columns, press Ctrl-C on the keyboard to copy that data,

and then I'm going to paste it, as I said, into row 24, so cell A24 just here. Now, this data at the

moment is all squeezed up into fairly narrow columns. So it's

probably best that we increase the width of these columns. And as I said earlier, all you need to do

to do that is just basically click and drag the intersections of these columns to increase the

width. Okay. So I'm just going to do that. So it tidies up the columns and what we're looking at a

little bit. And you can also do the same thing for rows. So I'm just going to reduce this row height a little bit.

So row 24.

Next, what we need to do is gather some S&P 500 price data

so that we can have a look at what happened to equities

in the past and compare it with fluctuations that we see in M2.

And typically, we can get hold of S&P 500 data fairly easily from multiple different

sources. Yahoo Finance is a prime example of being able to get price data for various different

assets. And typically that would be my go-to source for free price data. But in this video,

I'm going to use investing.com. And there's a a good reason for that and I want to highlight this now. The reason being basically that Yahoo Finance data for the S&P 500 index is being a little bit

temperamental at the moment and the reason why I want to highlight that is just because it shows

that you need to be flexible in the sources that you gather data from. So you're going to have to

use a bit of intuition sometimes and just be flexible in how you gather data

from multiple different sources if you need to.

So I'm going to go onto my web browser now and navigate to investing.com and when you

do that the page should look something like this.

In order to find S&P 500 data you can just type in the search bar at the top S&P 500

and then choose the S&P 500 index from the

drop-down menu that you see in front of you. When you do that you get taken to the S&P 500 index page

and you can find a tab for historical data down here and you just need to set

select that and then it presents us with the historical data page for the S&P 500 index.

Now we've got monthly data for our M2 money supply so we want monthly data for the S&P 500 as well.

So I'm going to change the time frame on the left hand side here from daily to monthly and then I'm

going to click into this calendar box on the right hand side here to select the time period for which

we want to gather prices for. So you'll see when I do that we can enter some custom dates on the

left hand side the start date and the end date. Unfortunately unlike Yahoo Finance it doesn't

have a quick option just to choose all data available and we actually have to put in manual dates. So what I'm going to do is just put in January 1st 1950

and when I do that, when I enter that into the start date, you'll see that the calendar

flicks back as far as possible which in this case is just to the 1st of January 1970. So that tells

us that this data is only going to go back to

that period. That's fine, we don't actually need to change this for now. We can just leave it as 1950 and it will go back as far as possible. And then in the end date we can choose whatever we want,

so a recent day. So I'm filming this in March, I'll choose the 15th of March 2021 and then we can just click apply and download the data. Now as I said

before when we gathered money supply data for me when I download files I get an option to open it

a shortcut option at the bottom left of my browser. For you guys that might be different depending on

the platform you're using and the web browser you're using. You just need to make sure you navigate to that

download and open the file and by default this CSV file should open in

Excel. So I've just clicked on that now to open it and you can see here now we've

got a file with all of the S&P 500 prices going back historically on a monthly basis, back as far as the data set goes on investing.com, which is to 1970.

We've got our prices in column B and we've got our monthly dates in column A.

want to do here is copy across our S&P 500 prices from this sheet into our historical analysis

M2 month-on-month sheet here in this file that we were just looking at. And we want to make sure that when we copy the S&P 500 prices across they basically line up with the correct dates. So we're

going to put them into the correct rows and there's a few things to consider here when we're doing this. The first is that we've got a much longer data set for M2 than we do for S&P 500

prices. The M2 data set goes back to 1959, whereas the S&P 500 data that we have goes

back to 1970. So we'll probably end up deleting all of

the data for M2 before 1970 so that we've just got two columns that match. The other thing to consider

is if you look at this M2 data all the observation dates are in an ascending order. What that means is

the top row in the data set is the earliest date okay and the bottom row in the data set is the

latest date and if we look at our S&P 500 data it's the opposite way around. The bottom row in the data set is the latest date and if we look our S&P 500 data

it's the opposite way around the top row in the data set is the latest date and the bottom row

is the earliest date and that means the order of dates is descending so one way to fix that

very quickly in this S&P 500 data is select any one of the title cells in the top row of the sheet and then go to data

on the ribbon and click filter and then from there we click inside the date filter option here this

drop down arrow and we can just sort by oldest to newest rather than newest to oldest okay so I'm

just going to click sort oldest to newest and you'll see that it shuffles all of the data so it's now

in an ascending order not a descending order. The other thing that I want to make a note of here

in regards to dates and lining this data up is if we go back to our M2 data what you'll see is all

the observation dates on a monthly basis fall on the first of each month. Now in actual fact when

you look at the details of the M2 data from the Federal Reserve Economic Database website you'll

see that these M2 money stock values are actually average values over the entire month. So they're

not the M2 money stock values on the first of every month, they're actually the average for the entire month. So if we take this observation as an example on the 1st of January 1959,

this actually applies to the average value for the whole of January 1959. Now for this analysis,

this isn't really going to affect things too much and we're not too worried about it taking an

average but I just wanted to point that out because it's just something that you need to consider

when you download data in general.

Basically digging deeper and finding out exactly how the data is structured.

Because it might matter for a different analysis that you're doing that the exact dates don't line up.

Now, if we go back to our S&P 500 data here, if you were to download this

data from Yahoo Finance, you would get the prices at the end of the month. And in the date column,

it would show that the monthly dates are basically the end of every month. Okay, so the last day,

the closing values for the last day of

each month now when you download data from investing.com you get the first day of every month but

counter intuitively really and this is again something to watch out for the price data that you get for

that month despite it saying it's from the first day of each month is actually for the last day of

each month so it's still closing prices for the end of the month even though when you actually select

these date values in column a you can see it's always from the first day of each month okay so

just something to bear in mind like i said for this for this analysis it doesn't really matter too much okay we're going to

be lining up end of month prices with average money stock over those months okay so that that's not

really an issue. So to copy this data into our other spreadsheet I'm going to select from our first

date and first price that we have in this S&P 500 data.

So February 1970, a price of 89.5.

I'm going to press Ctrl-Shift and down to select all of the data down to the bottom of this sheet,

or down to the bottom of the data set anyway.

Once that's selected, I'm going to copy it by pressing Ctrl-C,

and then I'm going to go over to our M2 historical analysis sheet and I'm going to make

sure that I go down to the February 1970 row. Okay so down to here row 158 and copy that into this

sheet. Now the reason why I've taken the dates from the previous sheet from the S&P 500

data is just to make sure that when you do copy it in you can see that the date

columns match up but actually we no longer need this date column that we've

just copied in once we know that that's true okay so what you can do is just

left-click column C at the top here right-click within that selection and go

to delete and that will delete the date column there. Now remember what I said we're going to do with our data that's prior to

February 1970, so all of the data that we don't have or all of the dates, sorry, that we don't

have S&P 500 data for. We're basically just going to just delete it, get rid of it. So what I'm going to do is left click and drag

on these row numbers from row 157 all the way to the first observation date that we have. That's

going to select all of those rows in their entirety. I'm going to right click in that selection and

delete all of those as well. And then what you can see is we've just got a nice clean data set with

our observation dates, our M2 money stock average

values over those months and this will be S&P 500 prices so I'll title that column appropriately as

well and put that title in bold in cell C24. Okay so remember what we're trying to do here is a

historical assessment comparing abnormal M2 growth values on a monthly basis to market events which will show up in S&P 500 prices.

So we still need to calculate our M2 month on month percentage change again. So in this column, column D, in cell D24, I'm just going to type

title this column M2 month on month percentage growth.

Okay, and I'll make that column title bold.

We can also wrap the text of this column title within the home tab on the ribbon just to make

sure the title fits in the cell.

And then we're going to run our calculations just as we did previously.

So basically all we need to do is in the second cell down I'm going to type in that cell d26 equals

the money stock that we see for March 1970 okay our second observation divided by our first

observation the February 1970 observation okay and that's going to calculate our growth once we

minus one from that equation as well so when I press enter there you'll see that

that returns to us a month on month percentage growth value for m2 for that month and I'm just

going to copy that formula down to the bottom of the sheet very quickly by double clicking the little

green box in the bottom right of that selection. And then as we've done before we're going to

format all of those cells as percentages.

And I'm just going to basically right click within that selection that I've just copied

down, go to format cells, choose the category as a percentage, and then choose three decimal

places. And that's it. We've got our M2 month on month percentage growth in percentage format. And we can now look at those values and see how they compare to S&P 500 prices.

So before we go on to some analysis and drawing some comparisons between our M2 data and

the S&P 500 prices, let's just double check all of the data that we have in this table

so far. What I'm going to do is basically scroll to the bottom of the data that we have in this table so far. What I'm going to do is basically

scroll to the bottom of the data set with control and down on the keyboard and we just want to check

that all of our M2 data lines up with S&P 500 data for all of our observation dates and you can see

a bit of a problem here which has occurred because basically we have S&P 500 data for dates after January 2021 for the next two months

but we don't have M2 data for that period. So just to quickly resolve this we're just going to delete

our S&P 500 price data and our calculations in column D for those two rows. Okay so I'm just

selecting those cells and clearing the contents

by pressing delete on the keyboard. Okay, so as I said previously, we've left some space at the top

of the sheet here so that we can do some analysis. And we're going to include a chart and also some

percentile analysis. And both of those are going to allow us to kind of draw comparisons with m2 month-on-month

percentage change data and s p 500 price data and we're going to start with a visual assessment so

we're going to start with the chart first and we're going to basically plot s p 500 data and our m2

within the same chart to make it easy to kind of look at the data and compare it

over time. So I'm clicking into cell B2 here and then I'm going to go to insert

on the ribbon and insert a 2D line chart and I'm going to move that chart

area that's just appeared on the sheet into the top of the sheet and then make

the chart area a bit bigger. And as I said, we want to include both S&P 500 prices

and M2 month-on-month data in this chart.

So what I'm going to do is right-click within this chart

and go to Select Data and add a series.

The first series that we're going to add is the S&P 500 data.

The series name, I'm just going to put equal to the title

that we see in cell C24 so S&P 500 and the series

values I'm going to overwrite what's in in this box at the moment and select all of our S&P 500

prices that we have from cell C25 down to the last observation cell C636 and then press OK.

Remember we always want to include the axis labels as well whenever

we include a series. So these are going to be our dates. I'm going to edit the horizontal

axis labels here and select all of our dates starting from our first observation, which

is A25, so A25, Ctrl-Shift and down to select all of the dates down to the bottom of the data set. So down to A636 and press OK.

Press OK again.

When we scroll to the top of the sheet, we'll see that we've got a nice line chart of all of our S&P 500 prices.

Now what I'm going to do is add in our M2 month on month percentage growth values into this same chart.

So I'm going to right click

within the chart, go to select data, we're going to add a new series and this series title is just

going to be the text that we see in cell D24. Okay, M2 month on month percentage growth and the series

values are just going to go from D25,

Ctrl+Shift+Down twice to get to the end of the data set.

So down to D636 and I press OK here.

And then we're going to edit the horizontal axis labels

just as we did with the S&P 500 prices.

So they're going to be our observation dates.

Now click on Edit there and choose all of the observation

dates that we have in this table as well.

Now I just want to make sure here that you guys understand why I chose the M2 month-on-month percentage growth data to start from cell D25 rather than D26 which is where our actual first

calculation was. It's just basically so that Excel knows to line up

the correct data with the correct rows. So if we chose from cell D26 and down,

then it would misalign those values with our dates and our other S&P 500 data. Okay, so

always best to make the series length the same basically for every series that you add to a chart.

Okay so you can see in our chart here basically we've got our S&P 500 price data which is the

blue line. We've got an axis which is configured to S&P 500 prices and we've got our M2 month-to-month

percentage growth values. Now this orange line represents the month-on-month percentage growth values. Now this orange line represents the month-on-month

percentage growth values for M2 and you can see it's basically zero the whole way across which

makes sense because these values that we see in column D are basically zero. So how do we actually

compare you know the sort of trends and changes in M2 with S&P prices in a chart. Well we add these M2 month on month percentage

change values to a secondary axis. So an axis that's going to be on the right hand side of this

chart and to do that we can just click on that line, double click on that line I should say,

and then choose secondary axis from the format data series panel that appears on the right hand side

and you'll see then that that data then plots itself against a separate axis on the right hand

side of the chart and we can much more easily see changes that are occurring in month-on-month

percentage change data for m2 okay. There's definitely some aesthetic changes that I think we should make to this chart

so I'm going to go ahead and make a few changes now but just remember that when I'm doing this

whenever we're talking about the aesthetics of charts it's always down to kind of your own

personal taste so you don't necessarily have to follow these steps I'm going to go through exactly

you guys can just go ahead play around with the styles that you like to view charts in and just create your own. So the first thing that I want

to do is actually change this month on month line data to column data. Okay so to do that I'm

basically going to just go to chart type with the chart selected. So change chart type within the design tab on the

ribbon and then down here where it says chart type and there's a drop down menu next to M2

month on month growth I'm going to change this to a 2D column chart.

And in a similar way to what I did with the previous chart I'm going to basically color the

positive values of this column chart as green and the negative ones. I'm going to basically color the positive values of

this column chart as green and the negative ones as red. So to do that we can just click on that

series and go to fill and line in the format data series panel on the right hand side and then choose

solid color solid fill within the fill drop down the tab, and invert if negative and then we're going to choose our positive and negative colors.

Okay, so the positive color I'm just going to make dark green and the negative color I'm going to make red.

What I'm also going to do while I'm here is reduce the gap width.

width in the series options tab here so I'm just going to make the columns basically all appear

right next to each other with no gaps in between them. It'd be very hard to notice with this data

anyway but when you've got data that's less compact you know there's less of it and then you'll

you'll see this have more of an effect. So anyway I'm going to change the gap width to 0% there. And next what I want to do is change the S&P chart, the S&P line. Basically

there's a couple of things I want to change here. One I want to make it a sort of thinner black line

and the second more important factor that I want to change is the actual scale of the axis. And I'm

going to make it into a logarithmic scale okay because that's gonna allow us to see basically kind of percentage changes or percentage moves in

S&P prices historically more easily and I'll explain that in a moment let's first

change this line from this thick blue line to a dark black line that's thinner

so I've just clicked on that line there for S&P 500 prices and I'm going to go to fill and line on the format data series panel on

the right hand side and then for the line I'm going to choose a solid line, make

it black and also change the width in this box here just down a few points we

can make it one point wide. Okay so that just makes the line a little bit clearer

and a little bit more accurate

because it's thinner. Now let's go on to changing the scale as I mentioned before and the reason that

I want to kind of show you this is because when you're looking you know just kind of eyeballing

a historical chart like this you can you know you're looking at the S&P 500 from 1970 or maybe

you've got data before that as well basically when you look at this you can

barely see any changes in the line historically you know before say 1990 because the price has moved

you know so much in absolute terms over that period now obviously when you look at this and you think

about it in terms of percentages,

you know, month on month percentages or year on year percentages for the S&P 500, it's not like

it's moving hundreds of percent now. And it was only moving, you know, 5% back then. It was moving

similar percentages with similar volatility the whole way through its history. The reason why

that doesn't show up is because the absolute values

have changed so much. So logarithmic scales kind of help us see around this issue a little bit.

Basically it just allows us to eyeball you know changes in S&P 500 prices a little bit more easily

when we're dealing with long historical series. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to double click on the y-axis so the S&P 500 y-axis

and then I'm going to go to axis options and within this axis options tab in the

format axis panel I'm going to choose a logarithmic scale. When I tick this

box it's going to automatically scale this to base 10 and you'll see what that

means in a moment. So when I click this box you can see that it's changed the

price scale on the left hand side to start at 1 then it jumps to 10 to 100 to

1000 to 10,000 so basically for every constant height in the chart so it's

split it into four segments you can see into quarters it's actually multiplying

the scale by a

factor of 10. Now that's a bit much for this chart. Okay we don't need to do that we don't need to use

base 10 log for this for these prices. I think it shows up best with base 2. So I'm going to change

that value on the right hand side to 2. Press enter and you'll see what this does. Okay so now

it's going 1, 2, 4 one two four eight sixteen so it's multiplying

by two each time and then once we've done that i'm going to change the minimum bound for that axis

to 50 okay and we'll leave the maximum on auto and then what you can see is we can really kind of

easily understand changes in the s p 500 over time by doing that.

And it doesn't look as kind of skewed to the latest data as it did before.

Okay, so the final changes that I want to make to this chart is basically add a legend for each series to kind of define what each series is.

legend for each series to kind of define what each series is and then also add a y axis title to both the primary axis, primary y axis and the secondary y axis as well. So to do that I'm clicking on the

chart area. I'm going to go to the design tab on the ribbon, add chart element. We're going to start

with the legend. So I'm going to scroll down to this legend option here and then just put a legend at

the top you'll see that that adds a legend for defining you know which line is the S&P 500 data

and which line is the m2 data okay so that just makes it clear for us I'm then going to add

another chart element this is going to be our axis. It's going to be our primary vertical and secondary vertical axis titles that we're going to add. So

I'll do primary first and we're just going to rename this axis S&P 500 prices

and then add the other axis title as well, secondary vertical axis title as well secondary vertical axis title and rename this to M2 month

on month percentage growth and actually while I'm here I've just noticed that we

should probably convert this axis so our M2 growth values from decimals to

percentages so to do that we can just click or select that axis and then go to axis options.

So over here, axis options, number and choose category percentage to two decimal places is fine.

That makes more sense.

Okay.

do for the chart I think. Basically what that does is just give us a bit of a visual idea

of when large M2 month-on-month percentage changes happened historically and how they corresponded to

market movements. So what we can do now is formalize this a little bit by finding out which months

exactly had abnormal M2 growth and the way we can do that is by filtering the data that we have

M2 growth and the way we can do that is by filtering the data that we have by percentiles and percentiles are just the intervals that represent the top 1, 2, 3, 4, 5% of data and so on.

And we're only really concerned with the highest percentiles since they represent the most sort of

abnormal positive prints in M2. So let's have a look at creating those in another analysis table

on this sheet. So over in cell M2 here I'm going to head up this new analysis table. I'm going to

title it percentile analysis and in the cells below that so from M3 downwards I'm just going to

write out all the percentiles that we're going to calculate for our M2 month-on-month percentage change data. Okay, so I know I said previously that basically we're

most concerned with our abnormally positive data for M2 growth, but I think in order to be

comprehensive, we're going to calculate percentiles that are kind of abnormally low and, you know,

around the middle of the data as well,

because I think that will just help you in general with conducting percentile analysis going forward.

OK, so I'm just going to write these out now. I'm going to start with the first percentile.

We're going to do the lowest five percentiles here.

And then I'm going to skip to the 10th percentile, the 25th percentile, so the lowest quarter of data.

50th percentile, that would essentially be the median of the data, the middle of the data set.

Then the top quarter of data, the 75th percentile, the top 10% of data would be the 90th percentile.

And we obviously want to make sure we get the abnormal prints on the positive side, as I've been saying.

So we need to look at the top 5% of data

and so on. So here I'm just listing out all of the top kind of individual five percentiles

of data that we're going to find values for. Now to be clear about what percentile analysis actually is, a percentile is the value below which a percentage of the data falls within a given data set.

OK, so if we're looking at M2 month on month percentage growth as we are here, if we want to understand what the first percentile value is for that data set, we want to know the value at which 1% of the data falls below.

And the same applies for all of this. So if we look at the 99th percentile, we want to know

the value at which 99% of M2 growth data falls below. So the formula to

work that out in Excel is equals percentile.inc and I'm writing this into cell n3 because we're

going to work this out for the first percentile of data. So it's equals percentile.inc open brackets

then we're going to reference the array or the data set that we want to calculate this percentile

for which is obviously going to be the data we see in column

D our M2 growth data so I'm just selecting column D for that parameter I'm then going to put in a

comma to move on to the next parameter in the function and you can see that's just called K

and K just refers to or K just means basically the percentile that you want to calculate so what

we're going to do here is just click on the percentile we want to calculate.

So that's in cell M3, the first percentile, and then close the brackets for that function and press enter.

Okay, so we have a value now and that value represents the first percentile of data,

i.e. 1% of our M2 growth data falls below this value. And if I copy that

down, we can see, you know, that 99% of the data falls below this value for M2 growth. Now, before

I move any further on, let's change the formatting of these decimals to percentages. So I'm going to click and drag to select over cell N3 to N17, all those values we've just calculated.

Right click within that selection, go to format cells, change the category to percentage to three decimal places.

So this is a bit like what we did previously, just displayed in a slightly different way. So rather than looking

at somewhat arbitrary histogram intervals and standard deviations, we can look at exact

percentiles very quickly. And what we're saying here, for example, is that the top 5%

of M2 monthly growth values are above 1.2%, and the top 1% of monthly M2 growth values are above the value

of 2.1%. So that allows us to assess each monthly value that comes out in terms of what percentile

of M2 growth it falls within. So if the value is in the 95th percentile or higher we should probably

be paying attention to it and thinking about what that means. Does it mean the Fed's being reactive or proactive? Is it in line with what we're seeing

in other indicators? Is the stimulus enough or is it too little too late? So let's have a look at

some of these abnormal moves now with some historical context. And what I'm going to do here is basically filter our M2 data,

our M2 growth data for the top 2% of values and the way I'm going to do that is by clicking on

any one of our headings that we have for our columns of data down here. So I'm just going to

click on cell d24 our m2 growth data heading and then going to data on the ribbon and choosing filter

and then we want to select the filter drop down from our m2 growth data and then go to number

filters and choose greater than and what we're going to do here is filter all the values for our

m2 month on month growth so that it only shows values that are

greater than a certain number and that number is going to be whatever the 98th percentile value is

for our data so it's going to account for the top 2% of our M2 growth values so that value is 1.387%. Now in decimal format, that would be 0.01387.

So I'm just going to type that in that box there.

And we need to make sure obviously that we're only showing rows where M2 month-on-month growth is greater than.

So make sure greater than is selected from this dropdown.

And then we can press okay and what you'll see then

is it returns all the values or all the months where the m2 growth is in the top two percent of

all values okay so where it's above this 1.387 cutoff. Now before I go into any more detail about

these values or these months in particular,

let's have a look at our chart.

You can see that that's been disrupted somewhat by filtering the data.

And at the moment that chart is just trying to display the data that it sees in these

rows.

And so it's not basically displaying all of the data that's hidden.

And we want to change that because we don't really want our chart to be disrupted just

because we filter these data series down here. So I'm going to right click in the chart

and go to select data. I'm then going to choose this option down here called hidden and empty cells

and I'm then going to basically check this check box down here that says show data in hidden rows

and columns and press ok and you can see then that all our data in hidden rows and columns and press OK. And you can see

then that all our data is displayed despite some rows being hidden because we've used the filter

options. So back to our filtered data. Now obviously when you do this yourselves you can do this for

more percentiles and maybe you'll want to look at the top 5% rather than the top 2% but I just want

to give you an idea of the sort of historical context that you might find in these abnormal

moves and you can see here that the filters return just the top 2% of monthly M2 growth values and

obviously the associated dates that go with those and if we take a look through these dates you can

see some pretty

significant market events for the most part where either the Fed is responding to or preempting

liquidity issues. So for example, we've got September 2001, that was in response to the

attacks. We've got December 2008, that's obviously surrounding the global financial crisis. July and

August 2011, that's following the US credit downgrade. We've got all of the values for 2020

and 2021 dates. That's the sort of continuing provision of liquidity for the COVID pandemic.

provision of liquidity for the COVID pandemic. And then we've also got some more historical or older events here that are a little bit more structural in their nature, such as in 1983,

there was a removal of interest rate ceilings that meant basically a flood of money into money

market accounts that lifted M2. And and in 1971 there was massive inflation generally

partly partly due to a relatively lax monetary policy that led to wage and price freezes and

the exiting of the breston woods agreement so it's really important to do some digging and try to understand what's going on

at the time, you know, provide some context to basically what the Fed is doing with M2 growth.

Okay, so we've been through our M2 analysis, both on an individual basis and in the context

of historical market events. Hopefully you guys now have a good

understanding of how to do this analysis, why we do it and what to look out for. That was obviously a

very long tutorial and realistically this will take you quite some time the first time you go

through the process. The good news is that once you're comfortable with how all of this works

you can move on to using this

automated m2 template file that I've created here for you guys. So let me just run through quickly

how it works now. You can see it consists of two sheets that are almost exactly the same as the

ones that I've just built in front of you in this video. The difference being is that these sheets

will automatically update their

analysis components whenever you enter new data into the file so it's going to save you guys

quite a lot of time. I'll start by explaining the nominal M2 monthly sheet. The first thing to

notice here is that I've carried out the analysis for year on year M2 data as well as month on

month data as I said I was going to show you earlier. I've got

month on month analysis data running down the left hand side and year on year analysis running down

the right hand side and in terms of the analysis components everything is the same here that we've

been through apart from I've added some percentile analysis at the bottom. What I've done here for both month-on-month and year-on-year data

is display the monthly and yearly growth values that correspond to these various percentiles that

you can see. And as we looked at before, this can give you a much quicker and more accurate picture of just how abnormal

a certain move in M2 growth is. And to make things even easier, I've got a cell here that returns the

latest value and the corresponding month for both month on month and year on year M2 growth. And also

I've scored that value as a percentage of all of the values in the corresponding series. So

essentially, this is a really, really quick single number that tells you how abnormal the most recent data is. And you can

see at the moment the most recent percent rank for month on month data is 98.6% and year on year data

is 100% so that's the highest it's ever been. Now when it comes to year on year data it's not as

responsive as month on month data so in some ways it isn't as important when it comes to spotting

abnormal prints as we've discussed. But what it does tell you is just how much M2 growth that has

been over a longer period, so a year. And that gives you the idea of the sheer size and more

importantly, consistency of liquidity that's being provided by the Fed. And the best way to kind of use this analysis or use

both month-on-month and year-on-year data is by looking at them in combination as well as with

or in the context of other leading indicators. That's how you're going to find it the most useful.

So looking back at some of the analysis at the top of the sheet you'll see some error values

occurring particularly on the year-on-year side of the sheet you'll see some error values occurring

particularly on the year-on-year side of the sheet. Don't worry about these there's a reason that each

one can't return a value currently and I suggest that you just leave them as is. For example the

mode of year-on-year data can't be computed because there is no number that's been repeated

so it can't detect what the most common value is. For our negative

data analysis there are no negative year on year M2 growth prints ever so obviously those cells

will return an error until we see some negative year on year M2 values if we ever do. I'm not going

to go through the formulas in this template in any real detail because it's outside the scope of this

video but just so you know the way that everything here is automated is through the use of various

different formulas which you can have a look at just by clicking on the different analysis cells

in the sheet. By all means take a look at them, backward engineer them. If you're interested in

learning how to use Excel formulas for automating your own spreadsheets you're going to find some of

these really useful. The final thing I want to cover briefly are the steps that you need to take

to import new data into this template. So for this nominal M2 monthly sheet, you just need to

download the new M2 data as I showed you previously in the video and copy all of the dates and all of

the M2 values into columns A and b of this sheet and at that

point when you scroll to the bottom of the sheet you'll see that there are month on month and year

on year calculation columns that need to be updated as well so you can just update those

by clicking and dragging those formulas down as far as necessary to kind

keep up with the new data that you've imported. And once you've done that, all of the analysis

and charts will update automatically. If you want to update the historical analysis sheet as well,

you can. The same principles apply here. Make sure you remove the filter from the columns of data

that you already have and copy and paste the new dates M2 and S&P 500 data into columns A, B and C

in the correct rows, and then copy down the formulas that

you see in the M2 month-on-month column as required. You can also write some notes, as I've done here in

column E, when you go through the exercise of assessing M2 in the context of historical

economic or market events. You don't have to do that. I just think it's useful sometimes to do a bit

of historical analysis and try and understand the context of various

different M2 growth prints and that will give you a better frame of

mind really for understanding M2 prints going forward as well. Okay so well done

guys that was a long video it was a lot take in, I know. Go through the video and the accompanying downloads as many times as it takes to get this stuff to sink in. Once you do, you're going to be in a great position both in your understanding of the money supply, but also with your knowledge of how to carry out this kind of analysis in Excel, whether it's for money supply or any other data series that you want to look at in this way.

So the key points I want to end on here are: firstly, if we look at M2 money supply historically,

you'll see that there's a dynamic relationship in terms of correlation with the economy and markets

in the past. In the most recent few decades, M2 has been used as a monetary stimulus policy to provide

liquidity and that's how it's still used currently.

And the Fed either uses this in a reactive or a pre-emptive way when it sees either actual

or potential liquidity shocks.

To try and identify what significant M2 prints are, you're going to need to convert the M2

money supply into

monthly percentage changes and calculate the historic distribution of data series. And then

that gives you the context of what kinds of values are historically abnormal and therefore

significant. Abnormal prints can be identified in a number of ways. We used a histogram table

and chart at the beginning. We also looked at standard deviations. Although remember when it came to M2 growth data it's not exactly normal in terms of

its distribution and so using standard deviation requires some careful consideration. As well as

those methods we've also cut right to the chase by using percentiles which help us identify what values correspond to, for example,

the top 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5% of data. In the automated sheet I've sped this analysis up for you further

by creating a formula that returns the latest data and its percent rank for you guys to assess as

soon as new data comes into the sheet. Once you've identified or think you've identified abnormal

prints, you need to think about those numbers in the context of your knowledge that's been built

up in the course so far and also the knowledge that you're going to learn in subsequent videos.

And you need to start asking yourself some questions. For example, does this M2 print value

make sense considering what money market indicators and other leading indicators are saying?

If it doesn't, why not?

What is the Fed seeing or what might the Fed be seeing that I'm not?

Is the Fed being preemptive or reactive?

If it's being reactive, do we think the stimulus is enough or it's too little too late?

If it's being reactive, do we think the stimulus is enough or it's too little too late?

And I'm not saying you're going to have to have concrete, 100% accurate answers to these questions.

That's completely unrealistic.

They're very difficult to answer in some circumstances.

But just by thinking about them is going to lead you down the right track in terms of thinking and understanding where markets are currently and also where they're heading. So that's it for this video. I hope you guys enjoyed it. Well done again for getting through it. Remember to go through this video and the downloads as many times as you need to understand

it properly. And don't worry if it takes time. It's all just part of the process. Remember,

you're trying to build towards conscious competence, and you will get there if you

follow the series and implement what you learn. Good stuff, guys. We'll finish there, and I'll see you

later in the series. Okay, so welcome back to the desk again. So, that was a very long video being over three hours long. But it's important to get

on top of this stuff. Learn and utilize the method. So the distribution of returns method

and analysis. If you do that, you will give yourself the ability to determine what is normal and abnormal in asset prices and in economic indicators.

So when it comes to M2 money supply, you can understand Fed intentions.

And if there's any read across into other areas of the money market

and read-across into the stock market.

So use the M2 money supply accessory on a regular basis

and in conjunction with other money market indicators.

So real rates, the yield curve, and aggregate corporate bond indices.

And use it in conjunction as well with other leading indicators. rates, the yield curve and aggregate corporate bond indices.

And use it in conjunction as well with other leading indicators that we're going to be covering next in the PTM video series.

Speaking of which, we're now going to move away from the money market

leading indicators. And we're now going to be looking at surveys. And there are lots of them.

We are going to be covering all of the main macroeconomic surveys in the US and overseas.

They are very important as a set of indicators to add to your overall suite of macro indicators and in helping us for our macro view in the US

and the rest of the world.

So helping us to predict stock market direction in the US

and GDP growth direction in the US

and stock market direction internationally

and global GDP growth direction internationally.

So we regularly stay on top of our surveys and in conjunction with money market indicators and cyclical commodity prices,

which we're going to look at later, this will all form the basis of our macroeconomic dashboard.

So let's start with one of the most important macroeconomic surveys, and we will build up slowly and steadily to form our macroeconomic dashboard.

Let's start with the ISM Manufacturing Report on Business, and I'll see you back at the desk in video number eight.