Okay, so we're back at the screen.

We're now going to look at generating international trade ideas in individual equities,

like we did in the previous video using the ISM.

But now we're going to be looking at ADOS, American Depository Receipts,

which are essentially international companies, so non-domestic US companies. So we're looking at companies

outside the United States with listings on US exchanges as ADOs. Now this video is going to be

relatively shorter than most videos in the PTM video series, And that's because this is really just an exercise

in organization, common sense, and processing.

Now, if you recall the macro dashboard,

essentially what we're doing here

is we're looking at the right-hand side now

of the macroeconomic leading indicator dashboard.

When it comes to American depository receipts,

so international companies with US dollar-denominated stock listings

on US domestic exchanges,

when it comes to ADRs, there is a universe of ADRs.

At any one time, there's going to be a certain amount of ADRs. At any one time, there's going to be a certain amount of ADRs that are currently

listed on US exchanges. And of course, those stocks, those companies will have exposure to

different geographies around the world. However, their ADR listings mean they report in US dollars.

And similarly, even US companies that have international exposure

in their revenues and earnings will have exposure

to certain international geographies outside the United States.

So whether a company is listed in the U.S. as an international ADR,

denominated in U.S. dollars,

or it's a U.S. company with international exposure, regardless,

if a company has international exposure,

we, of course, as traders, need to have resources to enable us to

appraise the international exposure in establishing a portfolio bias. So what we'll be doing in this

video is looking at this in the context of ADOZ, so not US domestic companies with international exposure, but the same disciplines

would apply. So for example, a company, a German company has a ADR listing and they have large exposure with their

revenues and earnings in Germany, maybe also in Italy, maybe also across the rest of the European Union.

Of course, we need to be on top of German, Italian and European macroeconomics in order to have a portfolio bias,

a bias on German stocks that have exposure or companies that have exposure predominantly to the German

economy plus the Italian economy and even the wider European economy. So if we are establishing a bias,

a country bias, and therefore potentially a stock bias in stocks that have exposure to certain

geographies, we need to be on top of a number of

things from a macro perspective. So we want to be on top of our money market indicators in that

particular geography. We want to be on top of any surveys. And we also want to be on top of

international cyclical commodity prices. And whether we're seeing demand-led

or supply-led price increases or decreases. So yes, we use our macroeconomic leading indicator dashboard

to get an overall portfolio bias, but we do also use the macro dashboard in getting a geographical bias as well. It can also be used for

that. And on top of that, it can also be used for generating trade ideas in individual equities,

not only domestically in the US, so for US-listed domestic stocks, but also for international ADRs.

So what we're going to focus on here, because we've already covered international surveys

in Europe and China, we're going to focus here on the IHS market PMIs. So on the macro dashboard, you'll see the IHS market PMIs mentioned for Japan, UK, Brazil, and Canada.

And there is actually, in fact, a market PMI index for most countries.

Now, we also mentioned earlier in the video series about these things called American Depository Receipts, ADRs, when we were actually

discussing China. What ADRs actually are, are essentially secondary listings. So it's companies

that have their primary listing in another country, denominated in the currency of that country.

for that country. And what a lot of companies actually do is also choose to list equity in the US domestic market as American depository receipts denominated in US dollars.

And this is usually so institutional investors in the US,

US. So most importantly, US pension money can maintain custody holdings onshore. So it's lower

risk and it's in, well, denominated in US dollars. And it's a win-win for both sides because the

pension funds, US pension funds get to invest in these companies and the companies get to raise

capital in the United States.

Now if you recall from earlier in the video series when we covered ADRs when looking at

China, we covered them briefly there.

ADRs can trade on exchange and they can trade off exchange, so over-the-counter OTC.

What we're interested in as traders and portfolio managers, we're interested

in only the on-exchange ADRs, so the ones that we can access and trade on our brokerage platforms.

On top of that, many of these ADRs have listed options also, but some don't. So we always have to be aware of that. It's basically a function of market capitalization or size of the company and the liquidity of the stock.

of around 2,200 stocks in the U.S. domestically.

And what we can do when we start looking internationally is we can increase our opportunity set.

So we can use our international leading indicators

and we can use the IHS market PMIs

and American depository receipts

to increase the opportunity set from 2,200 stocks to 2,600 stocks.

So at the time of recording, we're looking at around 400 ADRs in terms of our ADR opportunity set.

And of course, this will change in the future.

There'll be more, there'll be less.

It doesn't really matter.

What you need to focus on here is the actual process.

And we're going to give you all of the resources here to do that.

So when it comes to the market PMIs,

we can use them in exactly the same way

as we use the ISM PMIs inside the US.

However, the data for all of the countries covered globally is very highly priced.

So IHS Market is a company and they do sell this data.

Unfortunately, it's very, very highly priced, costs a lot to purchase it upfront and maintain all of the data on a continual basis. You would literally have to pay IHS Market, the company, hundreds of thousands of dollars to

to get it and you'd be paying an annual subscription per user for tens of thousands of

dollars on a continuous basis.

The company itself, IHS Market is actually a public company and the company is registered

in Bermuda but they do have a listing in the US and the data product that they sell for PMIs is essentially aimed at

institutional traders, at investment banks and hedge funds, and also investors. So really,

we're looking at long-only asset managers and long-short portfolio managers as their clients,

not retail traders. So the price point for retail

traders to get hold of all of this data and manage it on a continuous basis is just not viable.

However, non-institutional traders and investors, like retail traders, can still benefit from the press releases and you can use this information in the

same way as we did for the ISM in the previous video to take positions in ADRs that are denominated

in USD. So we do have a download here that accompanies this video. So go to the downloads area and download the spreadsheet ADRs list.

This is going to help you understand how we actually process for individual ADR or individual equities trade ideas in ADRs utilizing macro data. So this is just common sense processing, but we've put this all together for

you in a template to create an opportunity set for tradable ADRs at the time of making the video.

At any point in the future, you would just update this spreadsheet and use it as a template and utilize the resources mentioned in the video.

And of course, if resources change in the future, then you yourself, you're going to have to go and find other sources.

Concentrate on the process, guys.

It's the process that matters here. So in putting the sheet together here, we basically revisit the source for ADR information that. And there, what you're going to find is on-exchange listed,

so tradable ADRs, and they're split up into geographical regions first,

then by country.

And within each country, you're going to find ADRs that trade

both as on exchange and as OTC, over the counter.

And what you do here is you get a bit dirty, get a bit naughty,

and you scrape the data from the website.

So all you do is select the data and cut and paste it into a spreadsheet.

And this is what we've done for the spreadsheet in the downloads area,

ADR's list, and organized it all properly.

So what we do here is we calculate the opportunity set of foreign ADRs listed in the US and we organize the data properly by sector.

So with the template and the download, all the initial work has been done for you,

organizing the data in that spreadsheet.

However, on a continuous basis, you're going to have to maintain the sheet yourself,

and generally speaking, you're going to be updating it at least once, possibly twice a year.

ADR listings don't change very frequently, so you'll be infrequently updating this spreadsheet.

So what do we find when we put this spreadsheet together?

Well, there's 415 foreign ADRs at the time of recording that are tradable.

So they're traded on exchange at the time of recording this video, writing the presentation on the screen.

If we look at the data by country, we can see that the foreign ADR market is very much dominated

by China, mainland Europe, and the UK, making approximately combined 70% of all ADRs in total.

And then when we look at China's contribution to listed tradable ADRs,

China makes up around 37% of all ADRs. So this is around half of the ADRs when we add up China,

Europe, and the UK. Now, what's more important to us is the sector data. We can't simply look at market data for a particular country,

then go into the ADR market, and then just go long or short a particular stock,

because the macro data in the country where a stock has its primary listing was either good or bad.

listing was either good or bad. So firstly, a company that has its primary listing in a particular country may have very small or even no exposure in their revenues and earnings to that

country. And secondly, what's way more important for us after we've established a country bias or portfolio bias, when we're considering bottom

up fundamentals, and that's whether it's a US domestic stock or an international stock,

is the actual fundamental performance of the sector.

So we take the same approach here with ADRs and international companies as we do with all macro indicators.

At first, we establish a country or portfolio bias.

And then we look at particular sectors based on the filter of expected stock performance.

So volatility.

filter of expected stock performance, so volatility, that's based on growth, X growth,

defensive characteristics, and also EPS growth profiles. And of course, like we always do,

we do further work on positive and negative outliers and everything in between in the sector. Now, when we're processing and organizing this data on a sector basis,

we can rank the largest opportunity sets.

So on a sector basis, the largest amount of ADRs are characterized as pharma and biotech.

So in the pharma and biotech industry. And these are mostly untradeable defensive stocks.

And that makes up 15.42% of all ADRs.

Next, making up just over 11% of all ADRs

are software and computer services stocks.

And 35 of those stocks out of 46 are actually Chinese ADRs. Next up is banks and these

make up 6% of all ADRs and most of these are European and UK banks with some developed Asian

banks in Japan and Korea. But there's a total of 25 banks at the time of recording. Next sector

after banks is tech, hardware and equipment, which makes up about 6% again of all ADRs.

And these stocks are dominated by European companies and Taiwanese companies.

But there is a total of 24 ADRs in the tech, hardware, and equipment sector.

After that comes the financial services sector, which makes 5.3% of all ADRs, and these are mostly Chinese ADRs,

which are very dominant in this particular sector,

making up 18 of the 22 ADRs in the sector.

Next sector, we've got travel and leisure stocks,

travel and leisure ADRs, making up 4.34% of all ADRs.

And again, this is mostly Chinese ADRs covering airlines, hotels, and booking sites, which

are actually split fairly evenly.

After that, we have a marine transportation.

stocks making up again 4.34% of all ADRs totally dominated by Greek stocks. So 17 of 18 of those

stocks in marine transportation are Greek shipping stocks. Next in the sheet we actually combined

two sectors. So industrial metals and mining. So hybrid companies and more purer plays in mining.

And this comes out as 4% of all ADRs.

And this sector is dominated by South African stocks and Australian stocks.

But there's a total of 17 of these stocks.

So you can see how we go about things when we're

doing this. We're systematically ranking our opportunity set for ADRs based on sectors.

And we can actually go through each of these sectors and characterize them further and make some interesting observations and commentary

in further detailing the actual opportunities in each sector.

So let's start with the pharmaceutical and biotech sector.

And from a trader and portfolio manager perspective, especially for retail, this is a very important sector to discuss.

Not just in the context of ADRs, but also in the wider context to include all pharma and biotech stocks in the United States as well.

well. So in our ADR opportunity set, pharmaceutical and biotech stocks, even though it's the largest opportunity set of any sector in the foreign ADR's list, and it does make up 64 stocks,

we actually don't recommend that you trade them at least in your first year as a retail trader and perhaps even longer.

And this would also go for US pharma and biotech stocks as well. Now, why is this? Well, it's because it's probably

the most difficult sector in the entire stock market to actually have an edge in, even as a professional trader.

When you look at the individuals and organizations or institutional investors and traders that are involved in this sector at the highest level,

so if we're looking at hedge funds and investment banks, they have teams of PhD biochemists as both research analysts and portfolio managers that

have literally studied chemical compounds for years.

And the way pharmaceutical and biotech stocks work and how they're very, very, very, very

valued? Well, they have both current drug portfolios, so drugs that are being sold in the

market right now and making current sales, and they have pipeline drugs, so drugs that are not

currently being sold, but they're going through the approval process with the FDA. So they're going

through phase one, phase two, and phase three approval with the FDA. Now, the fair value or NPV of these

companies' stock prices is usually worked out on a per share basis by adding the DCF, the discounted

cash flow model of the current portfolio, together with a probability-adjusted DCF of the pipeline portfolio, and then we

arrive at an NPV per share.

Now, splitting this up into current and pipeline, the current portfolio will include in research

analyst models an assumption of when each drug reaches peak sales and when those drugs come off

patent. And in the pipeline portfolio, so drugs that are not yet approved, at different phases

of the approval process, so phase one, phase two, and phase three at the FDA approval process for the pipeline drugs,

what analysts do is they assign probabilities of approval that grow higher at each stage of the clinical trials.

So from a retail trader perspective, I mean, there's pretty much no way that you can have a real edge here over many trades in this sector over a long period of time.

Unless, of course, you're a PhD biochemist and an absolute finance whiz, or you actually have inside information.

So yes, the tradable ADR's opportunity set does increase our overall opportunity set in the stock market.

However, when we get into the details of the sectors themselves,

the biggest one, pharmaceutical and biotech stocks,

is not very conducive over a long period of time for retail traders to actually have an edge.

Certainly in your first year of trading, you should probably be avoiding both pharmaceutical

and biotech stocks in ADRs, in the ADR universe, and even US domestic listed stocks.

And I would say after your first year,

as long as you're up

and making quite a lot of money,

at that stage you will have earned the

right to go and

take positions

in the pharmaceutical and biotech

sectors and

As long as you're not betting the farm and you're actually implementing sensible risk management with single stock percentage limits on your portfolio,

where you don't actually have a large amount of exposure to one idea, then yes, as long as you do have an edge in a particular pharma or biotech stock,

then yes, you're essentially, because you're making money at this stage,

and making a good amount of money, you're betting with the house's money.

But even at that stage, you've got to really ask yourself the question here,

do you really have an edge in comparison to other sectors?

And is that capital really being optimized?

Because remember, that capital can go into something else where you potentially have a much better understanding and a much better edge in the idea.

understanding and a much better edge in the idea. So just bear in mind that even after one year where you're up and making good money, there's always opportunity cost for that capital to go

into other ideas. So from a total opportunity set perspective, yes, looking at increasing our opportunity set by introducing ADRs is a logical step.

However, we've just got to be a bit careful when we get into the details of understanding what the opportunities actually are.

And the pharmaceutical and biotech sector within ADRs is a classic example of that.

Next up is software and computer services stocks.

So here in the ADR opportunity set, in this sector, Chinese ADRs make up the vast majority here.

So they're making up 35 of the 46 software and computer services ADRs.

And in this sector, you can definitely have positions in these names.

So when you're actually working within the U.S. software

or computer services sector, and you're doing your quantitative work,

you should repeat the same analysis for these stocks and include them when they

are direct comparables or direct competitors to U.S. software or computer services stocks.

And what will happen is you'll just get a better understanding of how the market values

U.S. stocks in this sector versus Chinese stocks.

And of course, as with any trade idea generation process that you go through, you're going to

then graduate from the quantitative to the qualitative analysis.

phase. And in your processes, you take the same approach as you do in US-listed domestic stocks

with international ADOs. When you do further work at any point in time, when you do some further

digging, you're going to figure out the reasons why a particular stock in China trades, for example, at a premium or a discount to its direct comparables in the United States.

So for this sector, software and computer services, we can definitely take positions here.

here and we are increasing our opportunity set overall by bringing these ADRs into our overall opportunity set. Next up is the banks sector and most bank ADRs, as we saw earlier, are in Europe,

UK, Japan, Korea, and also there's banks in Chile. Now, when we look into this sector

and think of what opportunities it brings us, what it adds to our overall opportunity set,

well, when we look at the sector overall, globally, with the exception of some Chilean banks, the performance of the retail banking sector globally over the last 10 to 20 years has been pretty dismal.

And that's really because of the general trend of lower and lower interest rates.

So as interest rates have kept falling, the net interest margin at retail banks has collapsed.

And a lot of these banks, especially in Europe, operate essentially as zombie banks.

Now, again, when you're going through your processes here, you can compare the comparable bank valuations versus U.S. banks when you're working through the sector

and when looking for the best potential longs and shorts.

However, you have to remember to split them up properly and characterize each bank correctly.

So you've got to split them into investment banks, retail banks, and hybrids.

You need to make sure that you're comparing apples to apples them into investment banks, retail banks, and hybrids.

You need to make sure that you're comparing apples to apples and pairs to pairs and not apples to pairs.

And what you'll find is that comparable retail bank valuations are going to be primarily driven by net interest margins or differentials of net interest margins and the official interest

rate and market interest rate differential.

So when you're in this sector, in banks, in the ADRs, just tread carefully and

and make sure you're processing correctly, using as much common sense as possible.

Next sector on the list is tech, hardware, and equipment.

And in this sector, most of the ADRs are in Europe and Taiwan.

In Europe, the main stocks are semiconductor stocks,

so they're chip manufacturers with cellular or mobile handset, some peripheral manufacturers, and also some small 3D imaging stocks.

The ADRs from Taiwan are totally dominated by semiconductor stocks.

When you're processing, so when you're doing the work on the U.S. sector comparables,

it's essential in your processing to include these stocks in your analysis because the valuations of these companies on an absolute basis

and relative to each other, the valuation really matters,

especially in the semiconductor industry.

really matters, especially in the semiconductor industry.

But again, overall, bringing in this sector,

tech hardware and equipment from ADRs, the opportunity set in ADRs to our overall opportunity set

is totally feasible.

You can definitely have positions in international tech hardware

and equipment stocks with listed ADRs.

The semi-stocks, the semi-sector is highly cyclical,

and it's very useful for expressing macro-driven long and short trade ideas.

So by bringing this sector into our analysis, we are definitely increasing our overall opportunity set.

Next up is financial services and Chinese ADRs.

If you recall, make up 18 of the 22 ADRs in this sector.

The types of stocks that you're going to find in this sector, you're mostly going to find consumer loans businesses, mortgage

financing providers, and wealth management businesses. Now, it's pretty questionable whether

these stocks actually increase our overall opportunity set. Why? Because it's quite difficult

to get an edge here because a lot of the market caps of these stocks are very low and information about most of these companies is very hard to come by for retail traders.

So it's not likely that you're going to get many opportunities here

over a long period of time in this sector.

Next up is the travel and leisure sector

and seven of the 18 travel and leisure ADRs are Chinese again.

Across the board however of those 18 stocks there is a mix of airlines,

hotels and booking websites. What you'll find here in this sector with

ADRs is that you'll get a lot of various countries, low-cost airlines that trade as ADRs secondary

listings in the United States. So again, there's opportunities there. This is a highly cyclical

sector and very useful for doing sector work and sector processing for valuation comparisons

against US domestic stocks when you're pursuing

macro-driven trade ideas. So the travel and ledger sector does increase our opportunity set.

Next up is the marine transportation sector. And basically, all of these ADRs are shipping stocks from Greece, and generally they have very low market caps,

so they're not great stocks for shorts. However, where there are opportunities is on the long side,

so in the larger market cap stocks, they can potentially be used as macro-driven long ideas, long positions, especially in cyclical upswings.

And lastly, our final sector, we have industrial metals and mining,

so the hybrids plus pure mining stocks.

And what we've done here is just combined all industrial metals and mining sectors together

because they're very closely connected and highly cyclical.

When we look into the details of the sectors in industrial metals, Chinese ADRs fall into the commodity groupings of aluminium, steel and concrete.

And European ADRs into the steel category.

concrete and European ADRs into the steel category. South Africa has the most mining stocks and all of them are actually gold stocks and Europe has one stock that's predominantly a gold miner or gold

ADR. The UK and Australia has two large diversified global mining ADRs in BHP Billiton, which is Aus and UK, and Rio Tinto,

which is UK. So gold stocks are very US dollar and interest rate sensitive and can be compared

to gold stocks in terms of valuations in the US and Canada when you're doing your processing.

So in the gold stocks sector, gold equities, we are definitely increasing our opportunity set here.

Elsewhere where we're increasing our opportunity set is also in diversified miners.

The large cap diversified miners in particular can actually become useful shorts

in cyclical downturns and can also be compared as benchmarks in terms of valuation to mining

stocks in the US and globally. So we do overall,

here in industrial metals and mining stocks increase our opportunity set again.

So overall, guys, you've just got to tread carefully when you're looking at ADOZ and

make sure you're optimizing your opportunities on a sector basis.

So what you essentially have to do here with ADOS when you're processing is you have to marry up the macro and the micro as we did in the previous video with the ISM data.

However, we don't get data at the macro level for each country on a sector basis.

So what you have to do is look at, on the micro level, company valuations for ADRs relative to the United States,

and also look at the geographical distribution for revenue and earnings.

for revenue and earnings. And where it matters, you'll be overlapping the macro analysis,

the macro data with your micro analysis. So yes, we do both. We do the country analysis based on market PMIs, and we overlap that with our sector analysis and stock analysis.

And we overlap that with our sector analysis and stock analysis.

So you've just got to be organized at both the country level and the sector level.

So where do we actually go and get the country data?

Well, as mentioned previously in the video, we go to IHS market.

So we go to marketeconomics.com. And we go to the PMIs to look at PMIs for all countries.

So the first stop we go to on the homepage here is to look for the PMI calendar. So if you click

through to that, you'll get taken to a section where you've got calendar and PMI releases.

section where you've got calendar and PMI releases.

If you click on the calendar, you'll be taken to a page where you have all upcoming PMI releases for each country.

So all very straightforward. You read the press releases and you figure out

whether the manufacturing and service sectors are actually growing, slowing, or contracting

in those countries. So you'll have upcoming releases in the calendar, so you can stay on top of those,

and you also have the past releases as well. So if you click on PMI releases, all of the most recent past releases are going to come up.

And going back further, they're going to be indexed in the website by the month they were released.

So yes, what you're getting here in most cases is just the headline.

data and in some cases, more detailed breakdown and some commentary.

But overall, it's useful stuff to add in to your overall macro dashboard and then marry

this up with your micro work.

So let's summarize all of this when it comes to market data and ADRs.

to market data and ADRs.

If we look at our ADR universe and we look at what's available in terms of market PMIs globally, how is this helping us get more trade ideas?

How do we actually utilize market PMIs for our macro-driven ADR trade ideas?

for our macro-driven ADR trade ideas?

Well, a lot of these trade ideas can be generated by simply utilizing the market data in the same way as we use the ISM data in the U.S.

If we go through each sector for ADRs, we can see what the opportunities actually can be in the future

and what we need to stay on

top of in terms of macro. So we're going to stay away from pharma and biotech in Chinese software

and computer services ADRs. These are cyclicals and their potential accounting frauds. So most of the time, what you're going to be doing in this sector

is probably using this sector in ADRs for short ideas. When we look at banks, we look at Europe,

UK, Japan, even Chilean, this sector is interest rate cycle sensitive relative to the US.

And this is going to present us potential long and short ideas.

When we look in the travel and leisure sector for ADRs, these are airlines, hotels, booking sites,

and these are essentially cyclical proxies on the economy, and we can get both long and short ideas here. For the Greek shipping stocks,

these are highly cyclical, low market cap, but the higher market cap ones can provide us with

selective longs in periods of expansion. In industrial metals and mining, so for South African and European gold stocks, we've got US dollar and interest rate proxies there.

So we can use that sector for both longs and shorts.

For the mega cap diversified mining stocks with their primary listings in the UK and Australia, we're going to be using those potentially as short ideas in cyclical downturns.

And then for all other ADRs, so all other listed ADRs,

they're just useful for assessing direct comparable valuations versus they

US peers. Now, remember, one trap that you don't want to fall into here is looking at a country's

PMIs and then deducing that because a company has its primary listing in a particular country,

then readings of that country's PMI is significant for the stock. It may not be the case if the company is a global player.

So for example, with the UK listed mega cap mining stocks, yes, they have their primary

listing in the UK, but they have globally diversified revenues. Now you will notice

that across the board, with the exception of the

pharmaceutical and biotech sectors, that the ADR universe can be characterized as mostly cyclical

in nature, and also mostly what we would call old economy stocks. So in banking and financial services, industrial metals and mining, tech

hardware and equipment, travel and leisure and shipping. So it's just important to remember that

we're not here looking at what we would term new economy stocks. We're predominantly looking at old economy sectors, old economy stocks.

Now we can get exposure as traders to both positive and negative cyclical outliers in the US.

However, it's important to see the whole picture globally by including these stocks in our quant analysis. Once, of course, after we've established a country bias, if it's required.

And just remember, country biases are not necessary if a company or their stock is a global operator.

But if it is a local operator where it has a very high percentage of their revenues and

earnings in a particular country, then a country bias is absolutely necessary.

Okay, guys, so this brings us now to the end of this video where we're looking at the ADR universe and generating trade ideas there from market PMIs.

Let's head over to the desk for a recap here.

Okay, so welcome back to the desk, guys.

So the last couple of videos, we looked at how to generate single stock trade ideas utilizing macroeconomic indicators.

And in the first video, we looked at how we do it in the US, and then in the second video, how we actually go about that process internationally.

So, as you can see, what it really comes down to is just being very organized, using a lot of common sense,

and engaging in many of the processes that we've actually seen as core processes in previous parts of the PTM video series.

So, in the US, we looked at the example of the ISM manufacturing data,

looked at the example of the ISM manufacturing data, but we can also look at sector data in the service sector as well in the non-manufacturing report on business. We can also look at, for

example, the UMCSI, the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index, and we can look for

straight consumer plays in single stocks. We can also look in building permits, which will give us

straight up plays in single stocks in the construction sector and even in the financial

sector as well, and all of the subsectors within the financial sector. So in the US, the sector data in the ISM, what did we actually see there?

Well, it led us to join the dots between the macro and the micro.

So the sector data allows us to do that.

But remember, you still have to do all of the work on the individual stocks themselves.

individual stocks themselves. So once you've identified sector trends or potential changes to trend,

this doesn't mean abandon the entire trade idea generation process at the stock level, okay? You still have to do the quantitative assessment. You still have to do the qualitative work. You still have to

look for catalysts, and you still have to structure and time your trades as best as possible.

Now for international macro-driven individual stock trade ideas in American depository receipts,

ADRs, we use those to increase our opportunity set. But we do have to be very careful and make sure that when we're joining the dots between macro and micro, that we're not coming to false conclusions.

that if we identify strong or weak macro conditions in a particular geography, we need to make sure that we get exposure in a single stock, in a play that's as accurate as possible.

It's as representative as possible. So we capture the micro in the revenue and earnings of the single stock that we're taking

a position in.

There's no point in identifying a surprise change in trend or a macro change in trend

in a particular geography if the price is going to be a little bit.

position that you end up with is either not directly exposed to that in their revenue and

earnings or just has very little exposure to it. We need to get as pure a play as possible. So again,

it just comes down to being organized, using common sense and joining the dots properly.

Okay, so we're now going to move into the next part of the PTM video series.

We're now going to be looking at timing your trade ideas as optimally as possible. So the next two

videos are going to be split into two parts. We're going to be looking at technical analysis and price

action. So technical analysis is primarily concerned with pattern recognition and price action is primarily concerned with momentum indicators. And on the surface, it all sounds very scientific and really impressive. But once you understand the content properly and both its uses and its limitations, it really isn't that

impressive, guys. So let's dive into it. Let's go into the dark world of technical analysis

and price action. And I'll see you back at the desk a little bit later on.